that truth and justice and love which he himself is . Thus the belief in the immortality of the soul rests at last on the belief in God . If there is a good and wise God , then there is a progress of mankind towards perfection ; and if there is no progress of men towards perfection , then there is no good and wise God . We can not suppose that the moral government of God of which we see the beginnings in the world and in ourselves will cease when we pass out of life . 11 . Considering the 'feebleness of the human faculties and the uncertainty of the subject , ' we are inclined to believe that the fewer our words the better . At the approach of death there is not much said ; good men are too honest to go out of the world professing more than they know . There is perhaps no important subject about which , at any time , even religious people speak so little to one another . In the fulness of life the thought of death is mostly awakened by the sight or recollection of the death of others rather than by the prospect of our own . We must also acknowledge that there are degrees of the belief in immortality , and many forms in which it presents itself to the mind . Some persons will say no more than that they trust in God , and that they leave all to Him . It is a great part of true religion not to pretend to know more than we do . Others when they quit this world are comforted with the hope 'That they will see and know their friends in heaven . ' But it is better to leave them in the hands of God and to be assured that 'no evil shall touch them . ' There are others again to whom the belief in a divine personality has ceased to have any longer a meaning ; yet they are satisfied that the end of all is not here , but that something still remains to us , 'and some better thing for the good than for the evil . ' They are persuaded , in spite of their theological nihilism , that the ideas of justice and truth and holiness and love are realities . They cherish an enthusiastic devotion to the first principles of morality . Through these they see , or seem to see , darkly , and in a figure , that the soul is immortal . But besides differences of theological opinion which must ever prevail about things unseen , the hope of immortality is weaker or stronger in men at one time of life than at another ; it even varies from day to day . It comes and goes ; the mind , like the sky , is apt to be overclouded . Other generations of men may have sometimes lived under an 'eclipse of faith , ' to us the total disappearance of it might be compared to the 'sun falling from heaven . ' And we may sometimes have to begin again and acquire the belief for ourselves ; or to win it back again when it is lost . It is really weakest in the hour of death . For Nature , like a kind mother or nurse , lays us to sleep without frightening us ; physicians , who are the witnesses of such scenes , say that under ordinary circumstances there is no fear of the future . Often , as Plato tells us , death is accompanied 'with pleasure . ' ( Tim . ) When the end is still uncertain , the cry of many a one has been , 'Pray , that I may be taken . ' The last thoughts even of the best men depend chiefly on the accidents of their bodily state . Pain soon overpowers the desire of life ; old age , like the child , is laid to sleep almost in a moment . The long experience of life will often destroy the interest which mankind have in it . So various are the feelings with which different persons draw near to death ; and still more various the forms in which imagination clothes it . For this alternation of feeling compare the Old Testament , -- Psalm vi . ; Isaiah ; Eccles . 12 . When we think of God and of man in his relation to God ; of the imperfection of our present state and yet of the progress which is observable in the history of the world and of the human mind ; of the depth and power of our moral ideas which seem to partake of the very nature of God Himself ; when we consider the contrast between the physical laws to which we are subject and the higher law which raises us above them and is yet a part of them ; when we reflect on our capacity of becoming the 'spectators of all time and all existence , ' and of framing in our own minds the ideal of a perfect Being ; when we see how the human mind in all the higher religions of the world , including Buddhism , notwithstanding some aberrations , has tended towards such a belief -- we have reason to think that our destiny is different from that of animals ; and though we can not altogether shut out the childish fear that the soul upon leaving the body may 'vanish into thin air , ' we have still , so far as the nature of the subject admits , a hope of immortality with which we comfort ourselves on sufficient grounds . The denial of the belief takes the heart out of human life ; it lowers men to the level of the material . As Goethe also says , 'He is dead even in this world who has no belief in another . ' 13 . It is well also that we should sometimes think of the forms of thought under which the idea of immortality is most naturally presented to us . It is clear that to our minds the risen soul can no longer be described , as in a picture , by the symbol of a creature half-bird , half-human , nor in any other form of sense . The multitude of angels , as in Milton , singing the Almighty 's praises , are a noble image , and may furnish a theme for the poet or the painter , but they are no longer an adequate expression of the kingdom of God which is within us . Neither is there any mansion , in this world or another , in which the departed can be imagined to dwell and carry on their occupations . When this earthly tabernacle is dissolved , no other habitation or building can take them in : it is in the language of ideas only that we speak of them . First of all there is the thought of rest and freedom from pain ; they have gone home , as the common saying is , and the cares of this world touch them no more . Secondly , we may imagine them as they were at their best and brightest , humbly fulfilling their daily round of duties -- selfless , childlike , unaffected by the world ; when the eye was single and the whole body seemed to be full of light ; when the mind was clear and saw into the purposes of God . Thirdly , we may think of them as possessed by a great love of God and man , working out His will at a further stage in the heavenly pilgrimage . And yet we acknowledge that these are the things which eye hath not seen nor ear heard and therefore it hath not entered into the heart of man in any sensible manner to conceive them . Fourthly , there may have been some moments in our own lives when we have risen above ourselves , or been conscious of our truer selves , in which the will of God has superseded our wills , and we have entered into communion with Him , and been partakers for a brief season of the Divine truth and love , in which like Christ we have been inspired to utter the prayer , ' I in them , and thou in me , that we may be all made perfect in one . ' These precious moments , if we have ever known them , are the nearest approach which we can make to the idea of immortality . 14 . Returning now to the earlier stage of human thought which is represented by the writings of Plato , we find that many of the same questions have already arisen : there is the same tendency to materialism ; the same inconsistency in the application of the idea of mind ; the same doubt whether the soul is to be regarded as a cause or as an effect ; the same falling back on moral convictions . In the Phaedo the soul is conscious of her divine nature , and the separation from the body which has been commenced in this life is perfected in another . Beginning in mystery , Socrates , in the intermediate part of the Dialogue , attempts to bring the doctrine of a future life into connection with his theory of knowledge . In proportion as he succeeds in this , the individual seems to disappear in a more general notion of the soul ; the contemplation of ideas 'under the form of eternity ' takes the place of past and future states of existence . His language may be compared to that of some modern philosophers , who speak of eternity , not in the sense of perpetual duration of time , but as an ever-present quality of the soul . Yet at the conclusion of the Dialogue , having 'arrived at the end of the intellectual world ' ( Republic ) , he replaces the veil of mythology , and describes the soul and her attendant genius in the language of the mysteries or of a disciple of Zoroaster . Nor can we fairly demand of Plato a consistency which is wanting among ourselves , who acknowledge that another world is beyond the range of human thought , and yet are always seeking to represent the mansions of heaven or hell in the colours of the painter , or in the descriptions of the poet or rhetorician . 15 . The doctrine of the immortality of the soul was not new to the Greeks in the age of Socrates , but , like the unity of God , had a foundation in the popular belief . The old Homeric notion of a gibbering ghost flitting away to Hades ; or of a few illustrious heroes enjoying the isles of the blest ; or of an existence divided between the two ; or the Hesiodic , of righteous spirits , who become guardian angels , -- had given place in the mysteries and the Orphic poets to representations , partly fanciful , of a future state of rewards and punishments . ( Laws . ) The reticence of the Greeks on public occasions and in some part of their literature respecting this 'underground ' religion , is not to be taken as a measure of the diffusion of such beliefs . If Pericles in the funeral oration is silent on the consolations of immortality , the poet Pindar and the tragedians on the other hand constantly assume the continued existence of the dead in an upper or under world . Darius and Laius are still alive ; Antigone will be dear to her brethren after death ; the way to the palace of Cronos is found by those who 'have thrice departed from evil . ' The tragedy of the Greeks is not 'rounded' by this life , but is deeply set in decrees of fate and mysterious workings of powers beneath the earth . In the caricature of Aristophanes there is also a witness to the common sentiment . The Ionian and Pythagorean philosophies arose , and some new elements were added to the popular belief . The individual must find an expression as well as the world . Either the soul was supposed to exist in the form of a magnet , or of a particle of fire , or of light , or air , or water ; or of a number or of a harmony of number ; or to be or have , like the stars , a principle of motion ( Arist . de Anim. ) . At length Anaxagoras , hardly distinguishing between life and mind , or between mind human and divine , attained the pure abstraction ; and this , like the other abstractions of Greek philosophy , sank deep into the human intelligence . The opposition of the intelligible and the sensible , and of God to the world , supplied an analogy which assisted in the separation of soul and body . If ideas were separable from phenomena , mind was also separable from matter ; if the ideas were eternal , the mind that conceived them was eternal too . As the unity of God was more distinctly acknowledged , the conception of the human soul became more developed . The succession , or alternation of life and death , had occurred to Heracleitus . The Eleatic Parmenides had stumbled upon the modern thesis , that 'thought and being are the same . ' The Eastern belief in transmigration defined the sense of individuality ; and some , like Empedocles , fancied that the blood which they had shed in another state of being was crying against them , and that for thirty thousand years they were to be 'fugitives and vagabonds upon the earth . ' The desire of recognizing a lost mother or love or friend in the world below ( Phaedo ) was a natural feeling which , in that age as well as in every other , has given distinctness to the hope of immortality . Nor were ethical considerations wanting , partly derived from the necessity of punishing the greater sort of criminals , whom no avenging power of this world could reach . The voice of conscience , too , was heard reminding the good man that he was not altogether innocent . ( Republic . ) To these indistinct longings and fears an expression was given in the mysteries and Orphic poets : a 'heap of books ' ( Republic ) , passing under the names of Musaeus and Orpheus in Plato 's time , were filled with notions of an under-world . 16 . Yet after all the belief in the individuality of the soul after death had but a feeble hold on the Greek mind . Like the personality of God , the personality of man in a future state was not inseparably bound up with the reality of his existence . For the distinction between the personal and impersonal , and also between the divine and human , was far less marked to the Greek than to ourselves . And as Plato readily passes from the notion of the good to that of God , he also passes almost imperceptibly to himself and his reader from the future life of the individual soul to the eternal being of the absolute soul . There has been a clearer statement and a clearer denial of the belief in modern times than is found in early Greek philosophy , and hence the comparative silence on the whole subject which is often remarked in ancient writers , and particularly in Aristotle . For Plato and Aristotle are not further removed in their teaching about the immortality of the soul than they are in their theory of knowledge . 17 . Living in an age when logic was beginning to mould human thought , Plato naturally cast his belief in immortality into a logical form . And when we consider how much the doctrine of ideas was also one of words , it is not surprising that he should have fallen into verbal fallacies : early logic is always mistaking the truth of the form for the truth of the matter . It is easy to see that the alternation of opposites is not the same as the generation of them out of each other ; and that the generation of them out of each other , which is the first argument in the Phaedo , is at variance with their mutual exclusion of each other , whether in themselves or in us , which is the last . For even if we admit the distinction which he draws between the opposites and the things which have the opposites , still individuals fall under the latter class ; and we have to pass out of the region of human hopes and fears to a conception of an abstract soul which is the impersonation of the ideas . Such a conception , which in Plato himself is but half expressed , is unmeaning to us , and relative only to a particular stage in the history of thought . The doctrine of reminiscence is also a fragment of a former world , which has no place in the philosophy of modern times . But Plato had the wonders of psychology just opening to him , and he had not the explanation of them which is supplied by the analysis of language and the history of the human mind . The question , 'Whence come our abstract ideas ? ' he could only answer by an imaginary hypothesis . Nor is it difficult to see that his crowning argument is purely verbal , and is but the expression of an instinctive confidence put into a logical form : -- 'The soul is immortal because it contains a principle of imperishableness . ' Nor does he himself seem at all to be aware that nothing is added to human knowledge by his 'safe and simple answer , ' that beauty is the cause of the beautiful ; and that he is merely reasserting the Eleatic being 'divided by the Pythagorean numbers , ' against the Heracleitean doctrine of perpetual generation . The answer to the 'very serious question ' of generation and destruction is really the denial of them . For this he would substitute , as in the Republic , a system of ideas , tested , not by experience , but by their consequences , and not explained by actual causes , but by a higher , that is , a more general notion . Consistency with themselves is the only test which is to be applied to them . ( Republic , and Phaedo . ) 18 . To deal fairly with such arguments , they should be translated as far as possible into their modern equivalents . 'If the ideas of men are eternal , their souls are eternal , and if not the ideas , then not the souls . ' Such an argument stands nearly in the same relation to Plato and his age , as the argument from the existence of God to immortality among ourselves . 'If God exists , then the soul exists after death ; and if there is no God , there is no existence of the soul after death . ' For the ideas are to his mind the reality , the truth , the principle of permanence , as well as of intelligence and order in the world . When Simmias and Cebes say that they are more strongly persuaded of the existence of ideas than they are of the immortality of the soul , they represent fairly enough the order of thought in Greek philosophy . And we might say in the same way that we are more certain of the existence of God than we are of the immortality of the soul , and are led by the belief in the one to a belief in the other . The parallel , as Socrates would say , is not perfect , but agrees in as far as the mind in either case is regarded as dependent on something above and beyond herself . The analogy may even be pressed a step further : 'We are more certain of our ideas of truth and right than we are of the existence of God , and are led on in the order of thought from one to the other . ' Or more correctly : 'The existence of right and truth is the existence of God , and can never for a moment be separated from Him . ' 19 . The main argument of the Phaedo is derived from the existence of eternal ideas of which the soul is a partaker ; the other argument of the alternation of opposites is replaced by this . And there have not been wanting philosophers of the idealist school who have imagined that the doctrine of the immortality of the soul is a theory of knowledge , and that in what has preceded Plato is accommodating himself to the popular belief . Such a view can only be elicited from the Phaedo by what may be termed the transcendental method of interpretation , and is obviously inconsistent with the Gorgias and the Republic . Those who maintain it are immediately compelled to renounce the shadow which they have grasped , as a play of words only . But the truth is , that Plato in his argument for the immortality of the soul has collected many elements of proof or persuasion , ethical and mythological as well as dialectical , which are not easily to be reconciled with one another ; and he is as much in earnest about his doctrine of retribution , which is repeated in all his more ethical writings , as about his theory of knowledge . And while we may fairly translate the dialectical into the language of Hegel , and the religious and mythological into the language of Dante or Bunyan , the ethical speaks to us still in the same voice , and appeals to a common feeling . 20 . Two arguments of this ethical character occur in the Phaedo . The first may be described as the aspiration of the soul after another state of being . Like the Oriental or Christian mystic , the philosopher is seeking to withdraw from impurities of sense , to leave the world and the things of the world , and to find his higher self . Plato recognizes in these aspirations the foretaste of immortality ; as Butler and Addison in modern times have argued , the one from the moral tendencies of mankind , the other from the progress of the soul towards perfection . In using this argument Plato has certainly confused the soul which has left the body , with the soul of the good and wise . ( Compare Republic . ) Such a confusion was natural , and arose partly out of the antithesis of soul and body . The soul in her own essence , and the soul 'clothed upon ' with virtues and graces , were easily interchanged with one another , because on a subject which passes expression the distinctions of language can hardly be maintained . 21 . The ethical proof of the immortality of the soul is derived from the necessity of retribution . The wicked would be too well off if their evil deeds came to an end . It is not to be supposed that an Ardiaeus , an Archelaus , an Ismenias could ever have suffered the penalty of their crimes in this world . The manner in which this retribution is accomplished Plato represents under the figures of mythology . Doubtless he felt that it was easier to improve than to invent , and that in religion especially the traditional form was required in order to give verisimilitude to the myth . The myth too is far more probable to that age than to ours , and may fairly be regarded as 'one guess among many ' about the nature of the earth , which he cleverly supports by the indications of geology . Not that he insists on the absolute truth of his own particular notions : 'no man of sense will be confident in such matters ; but he will be confident that something of the kind is true . ' As in other passages ( Gorg. , Tim. , compare Crito ) , he wins belief for his fictions by the moderation of his statements ; he does not , like Dante or Swedenborg , allow himself to be deceived by his own creations . The Dialogue must be read in the light of the situation . And first of all we are struck by the calmness of the scene . Like the spectators at the time , we can not pity Socrates ; his mien and his language are so noble and fearless . He is the same that he ever was , but milder and gentler , and he has in no degree lost his interest in dialectics ; he will not forego the delight of an argument in compliance with the jailer 's intimation that he should not heat himself with talking . At such a time he naturally expresses the hope of his life , that he has been a true mystic and not a mere retainer or wand-bearer : and he refers to passages of his personal history . To his old enemies the Comic poets , and to the proceedings on the trial , he alludes playfully ; but he vividly remembers the disappointment which he felt in reading the books of Anaxagoras . The return of Xanthippe and his children indicates that the philosopher is not 'made of oak or rock . ' Some other traits of his character may be noted ; for example , the courteous manner in which he inclines his head to the last objector , or the ironical touch , 'Me already , as the tragic poet would say , the voice of fate calls ; ' or the depreciation of the arguments with which 'he comforted himself and them ; ' or his fear of 'misology ; ' or his references to Homer ; or the playful smile with which he 'talks like a book ' about greater and less ; or the allusion to the possibility of finding another teacher among barbarous races ( compare Polit . ) ; or the mysterious reference to another science ( mathematics ? ) of generation and destruction for which he is vainly feeling . There is no change in him ; only now he is invested with a sort of sacred character , as the prophet or priest of Apollo the God of the festival , in whose honour he first of all composes a hymn , and then like the swan pours forth his dying lay . Perhaps the extreme elevation of Socrates above his own situation , and the ordinary interests of life ( compare his jeu d'esprit about his burial , in which for a moment he puts on the 'Silenus mask ' ) , create in the mind of the reader an impression stronger than could be derived from arguments that such a one has in him ' a principle which does not admit of death . ' The other persons of the Dialogue may be considered under two heads : ( 1 ) private friends ; ( 2 ) the respondents in the argument . First there is Crito , who has been already introduced to us in the Euthydemus and the Crito ; he is the equal in years of Socrates , and stands in quite a different relation to him from his younger disciples . He is a man of the world who is rich and prosperous ( compare the jest in the Euthydemus ) , the best friend of Socrates , who wants to know his commands , in whose presence he talks to his family , and who performs the last duty of closing his eyes . It is observable too that , as in the Euthydemus , Crito shows no aptitude for philosophical discussions . Nor among the friends of Socrates must the jailer be forgotten , who seems to have been introduced by Plato in order to show the impression made by the extraordinary man on the common . The gentle nature of the man is indicated by his weeping at the announcement of his errand and then turning away , and also by the words of Socrates to his disciples : 'How charming the man is ! since I have been in prison he has been always coming to me , and is as good as could be to me . ' We are reminded too that he has retained this gentle nature amid scenes of death and violence by the contrasts which he draws between the behaviour of Socrates and of others when about to die . Another person who takes no part in the philosophical discussion is the excitable Apollodorus , the same who , in the Symposium , of which he is the narrator , is called 'the madman , ' and who testifies his grief by the most violent emotions . Phaedo is also present , the 'beloved disciple' as he may be termed , who is described , if not 'leaning on his bosom , ' as seated next to Socrates , who is playing with his hair . He too , like Apollodorus , takes no part in the discussion , but he loves above all things to hear and speak of Socrates after his death . The calmness of his behaviour , veiling his face when he can no longer restrain his tears , contrasts with the passionate outcries of the other . At a particular point the argument is described as falling before the attack of Simmias . A sort of despair is introduced in the minds of the company . The effect of this is heightened by the description of Phaedo , who has been the eye-witness of the scene , and by the sympathy of his Phliasian auditors who are beginning to think 'that they too can never trust an argument again . ' And the intense interest of the company is communicated not only to the first auditors , but to us who in a distant country read the narrative of their emotions after more than two thousand years have passed away . The two principal interlocutors are Simmias and Cebes , the disciples of Philolaus the Pythagorean philosopher of Thebes . Simmias is described in the Phaedrus as fonder of an argument than any man living ; and Cebes , although finally persuaded by Socrates , is said to be the most incredulous of human beings . It is Cebes who at the commencement of the Dialogue asks why 'suicide is held to be unlawful , ' and who first supplies the doctrine of recollection in confirmation of the pre-existence of the soul . It is Cebes who urges that the pre-existence does not necessarily involve the future existence of the soul , as is shown by the illustration of the weaver and his coat . Simmias , on the other hand , raises the question about harmony and the lyre , which is naturally put into the mouth of a Pythagorean disciple . It is Simmias , too , who first remarks on the uncertainty of human knowledge , and only at last concedes to the argument such a qualified approval as is consistent with the feebleness of the human faculties . Cebes is the deeper and more consecutive thinker , Simmias more superficial and rhetorical ; they are distinguished in much the same manner as Adeimantus and Glaucon in the Republic . Other persons , Menexenus , Ctesippus , Lysis , are old friends ; Evenus has been already satirized in the Apology ; Aeschines and Epigenes were present at the trial ; Euclid and Terpsion will reappear in the Introduction to the Theaetetus , Hermogenes has already appeared in the Cratylus . No inference can fairly be drawn from the absence of Aristippus , nor from the omission of Xenophon , who at the time of Socrates ' death was in Asia . The mention of Plato 's own absence seems like an expression of sorrow , and may , perhaps , be an indication that the report of the conversation is not to be taken literally . The place of the Dialogue in the series is doubtful . The doctrine of ideas is certainly carried beyond the Socratic point of view ; in no other of the writings of Plato is the theory of them so completely developed . Whether the belief in immortality can be attributed to Socrates or not is uncertain ; the silence of the Memorabilia , and of the earlier Dialogues of Plato , is an argument to the contrary . Yet in the Cyropaedia Xenophon has put language into the mouth of the dying Cyrus which recalls the Phaedo , and may have been derived from the teaching of Socrates . It may be fairly urged that the greatest religious interest of mankind could not have been wholly ignored by one who passed his life in fulfilling the commands of an oracle , and who recognized a Divine plan in man and nature . ( Xen . Mem . ) And the language of the Apology and of the Crito confirms this view . The Phaedo is not one of the Socratic Dialogues of Plato ; nor , on the other hand , can it be assigned to that later stage of the Platonic writings at which the doctrine of ideas appears to be forgotten . It belongs rather to the intermediate period of the Platonic philosophy , which roughly corresponds to the Phaedrus , Gorgias , Republic , Theaetetus . Without pretending to determine the real time of their composition , the Symposium , Meno , Euthyphro , Apology , Phaedo may be conveniently read by us in this order as illustrative of the life of Socrates . Another chain may be formed of the Meno , Phaedrus , Phaedo , in which the immortality of the soul is connected with the doctrine of ideas . In the Meno the theory of ideas is based on the ancient belief in transmigration , which reappears again in the Phaedrus as well as in the Republic and Timaeus , and in all of them is connected with a doctrine of retribution . In the Phaedrus the immortality of the soul is supposed to rest on the conception of the soul as a principle of motion , whereas in the Republic the argument turns on the natural continuance of the soul , which , if not destroyed by her own proper evil , can hardly be destroyed by any other . The soul of man in the Timaeus is derived from the Supreme Creator , and either returns after death to her kindred star , or descends into the lower life of an animal . The Apology expresses the same view as the Phaedo , but with less confidence ; there the probability of death being a long sleep is not excluded . The Theaetetus also describes , in a digression , the desire of the soul to fly away and be with God -- 'and to fly to him is to be like him . ' The Symposium may be observed to resemble as well as to differ from the Phaedo . While the first notion of immortality is only in the way of natural procreation or of posthumous fame and glory , the higher revelation of beauty , like the good in the Republic , is the vision of the eternal idea . So deeply rooted in Plato 's mind is the belief in immortality ; so various are the forms of expression which he employs . As in several other Dialogues , there is more of system in the Phaedo than appears at first sight . The succession of arguments is based on previous philosophies ; beginning with the mysteries and the Heracleitean alternation of opposites , and proceeding to the Pythagorean harmony and transmigration ; making a step by the aid of Platonic reminiscence , and a further step by the help of the nous of Anaxagoras ; until at last we rest in the conviction that the soul is inseparable from the ideas , and belongs to the world of the invisible and unknown . Then , as in the Gorgias or Republic , the curtain falls , and the veil of mythology descends upon the argument . After the confession of Socrates that he is an interested party , and the acknowledgment that no man of sense will think the details of his narrative true , but that something of the kind is true , we return from speculation to practice . He is himself more confident of immortality than he is of his own arguments ; and the confidence which he expresses is less strong than that which his cheerfulness and composure in death inspire in us . Difficulties of two kinds occur in the Phaedo -- one kind to be explained out of contemporary philosophy , the other not admitting of an entire solution . ( 1 ) The difficulty which Socrates says that he experienced in explaining generation and corruption ; the assumption of hypotheses which proceed from the less general to the more general , and are tested by their consequences ; the puzzle about greater and less ; the resort to the method of ideas , which to us appear only abstract terms , -- these are to be explained out of the position of Socrates and Plato in the history of philosophy . They were living in a twilight between the sensible and the intellectual world , and saw no way of connecting them . They could neither explain the relation of ideas to phenomena , nor their correlation to one another . The very idea of relation or comparison was embarrassing to them . Yet in this intellectual uncertainty they had a conception of a proof from results , and of a moral truth , which remained unshaken amid the questionings of philosophy . ( 2 ) The other is a difficulty which is touched upon in the Republic as well as in the Phaedo , and is common to modern and ancient philosophy . Plato is not altogether satisfied with his safe and simple method of ideas . He wants to have proved to him by facts that all things are for the best , and that there is one mind or design which pervades them all . But this 'power of the best ' he is unable to explain ; and therefore takes refuge in universal ideas . And are not we at this day seeking to discover that which Socrates in a glass darkly foresaw ? Some resemblances to the Greek drama may be noted in all the Dialogues of Plato . The Phaedo is the tragedy of which Socrates is the protagonist and Simmias and Cebes the secondary performers , standing to them in the same relation as to Glaucon and Adeimantus in the Republic . No Dialogue has a greater unity of subject and feeling . Plato has certainly fulfilled the condition of Greek , or rather of all art , which requires that scenes of death and suffering should be clothed in beauty . The gathering of the friends at the commencement of the Dialogue , the dismissal of Xanthippe , whose presence would have been out of place at a philosophical discussion , but who returns again with her children to take a final farewell , the dejection of the audience at the temporary overthrow of the argument , the picture of Socrates playing with the hair of Phaedo , the final scene in which Socrates alone retains his composure -- are masterpieces of art . And the chorus at the end might have interpreted the feeling of the play : 'There can no evil happen to a good man in life or death . ' 'The art of concealing art ' is nowhere more perfect than in those writings of Plato which describe the trial and death of Socrates . Their charm is their simplicity , which gives them verisimilitude ; and yet they touch , as if incidentally , and because they were suitable to the occasion , on some of the deepest truths of philosophy . There is nothing in any tragedy , ancient or modern , nothing in poetry or history ( with one exception ) , like the last hours of Socrates in Plato . The master could not be more fitly occupied at such a time than in discoursing of immortality ; nor the disciples more divinely consoled . The arguments , taken in the spirit and not in the letter , are our arguments ; and Socrates by anticipation may be even thought to refute some 'eccentric notions ; current in our own age . For there are philosophers among ourselves who do not seem to understand how much stronger is the power of intelligence , or of the best , than of Atlas , or mechanical force . How far the words attributed to Socrates were actually uttered by him we forbear to ask ; for no answer can be given to this question . And it is better to resign ourselves to the feeling of a great work , than to linger among critical uncertainties . PHAEDO PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE : Phaedo , who is the narrator of the dialogue to Echecrates of Phlius . Socrates , Apollodorus , Simmias , Cebes , Crito and an Attendant of the Prison . SCENE : The Prison of Socrates . PLACE OF THE NARRATION : Phlius . ECHECRATES : Were you yourself , Phaedo , in the prison with Socrates on the day when he drank the poison ? PHAEDO : Yes , Echecrates , I was . ECHECRATES : I should so like to hear about his death . What did he say in his last hours ? We were informed that he died by taking poison , but no one knew anything more ; for no Phliasian ever goes to Athens now , and it is a long time since any stranger from Athens has found his way hither ; so that we had no clear account . PHAEDO : Did you not hear of the proceedings at the trial ? ECHECRATES : Yes ; some one told us about the trial , and we could not understand why , having been condemned , he should have been put to death , not at the time , but long afterwards . What was the reason of this ? PHAEDO : An accident , Echecrates : the stern of the ship which the Athenians send to Delos happened to have been crowned on the day before he was tried . ECHECRATES : What is this ship ? PHAEDO : It is the ship in which , according to Athenian tradition , Theseus went to Crete when he took with him the fourteen youths , and was the saviour of them and of himself . And they were said to have vowed to Apollo at the time , that if they were saved they would send a yearly mission to Delos . Now this custom still continues , and the whole period of the voyage to and from Delos , beginning when the priest of Apollo crowns the stern of the ship , is a holy season , during which the city is not allowed to be polluted by public executions ; and when the vessel is detained by contrary winds , the time spent in going and returning is very considerable . As I was saying , the ship was crowned on the day before the trial , and this was the reason why Socrates lay in prison and was not put to death until long after he was condemned . ECHECRATES : What was the manner of his death , Phaedo ? What was said or done ? And which of his friends were with him ? Or did the authorities forbid them to be present -- so that he had no friends near him when he died ? PHAEDO : No ; there were several of them with him . ECHECRATES : If you have nothing to do , I wish that you would tell me what passed , as exactly as you can . PHAEDO : I have nothing at all to do , and will try to gratify your wish . To be reminded of Socrates is always the greatest delight to me , whether I speak myself or hear another speak of him . ECHECRATES : You will have listeners who are of the same mind with you , and I hope that you will be as exact as you can . PHAEDO : I had a singular feeling at being in his company . For I could hardly believe that I was present at the death of a friend , and therefore I did not pity him , Echecrates ; he died so fearlessly , and his words and bearing were so noble and gracious , that to me he appeared blessed . I thought that in going to the other world he could not be without a divine call , and that he would be happy , if any man ever was , when he arrived there , and therefore I did not pity him as might have seemed natural at such an hour . But I had not the pleasure which I usually feel in philosophical discourse ( for philosophy was the theme of which we spoke ) . I was pleased , but in the pleasure there was also a strange admixture of pain ; for I reflected that he was soon to die , and this double feeling was shared by us all ; we were laughing and weeping by turns , especially the excitable Apollodorus -- you know the sort of man ? ECHECRATES : Yes . PHAEDO : He was quite beside himself ; and I and all of us were greatly moved . ECHECRATES : Who were present ? PHAEDO : Of native Athenians there were , besides Apollodorus , Critobulus and his father Crito , Hermogenes , Epigenes , Aeschines , Antisthenes ; likewise Ctesippus of the deme of Paeania , Menexenus , and some others ; Plato , if I am not mistaken , was ill. ECHECRATES : Were there any strangers ? PHAEDO : Yes , there were ; Simmias the Theban , and Cebes , and Phaedondes ; Euclid and Terpison , who came from Megara . ECHECRATES : And was Aristippus there , and Cleombrotus ? PHAEDO : No , they were said to be in Aegina . ECHECRATES : Any one else ? PHAEDO : I think that these were nearly all . ECHECRATES : Well , and what did you talk about ? PHAEDO : I will begin at the beginning , and endeavour to repeat the entire conversation . On the previous days we had been in the habit of assembling early in the morning at the court in which the trial took place , and which is not far from the prison . There we used to wait talking with one another until the opening of the doors ( for they were not opened very early ) ; then we went in and generally passed the day with Socrates . On the last morning we assembled sooner than usual , having heard on the day before when we quitted the prison in the evening that the sacred ship had come from Delos , and so we arranged to meet very early at the accustomed place . On our arrival the jailer who answered the door , instead of admitting us , came out and told us to stay until he called us . 'For the Eleven , ' he said , 'are now with Socrates ; they are taking off his chains , and giving orders that he is to die to-day . ' He soon returned and said that we might come in . On entering we found Socrates just released from chains , and Xanthippe , whom you know , sitting by him , and holding his child in her arms . When she saw us she uttered a cry and said , as women will : ' O Socrates , this is the last time that either you will converse with your friends , or they with you . ' Socrates turned to Crito and said : 'Crito , let some one take her home . ' Some of Crito 's people accordingly led her away , crying out and beating herself . And when she was gone , Socrates , sitting up on the couch , bent and rubbed his leg , saying , as he was rubbing : How singular is the thing called pleasure , and how curiously related to pain , which might be thought to be the opposite of it ; for they are never present to a man at the same instant , and yet he who pursues either is generally compelled to take the other ; their bodies are two , but they are joined by a single head . And I can not help thinking that if Aesop had remembered them , he would have made a fable about God trying to reconcile their strife , and how , when he could not , he fastened their heads together ; and this is the reason why when one comes the other follows , as I know by my own experience now , when after the pain in my leg which was caused by the chain pleasure appears to succeed . Upon this Cebes said : I am glad , Socrates , that you have mentioned the name of Aesop . For it reminds me of a question which has been asked by many , and was asked of me only the day before yesterday by Evenus the poet -- he will be sure to ask it again , and therefore if you would like me to have an answer ready for him , you may as well tell me what I should say to him : -- he wanted to know why you , who never before wrote a line of poetry , now that you are in prison are turning Aesop 's fables into verse , and also composing that hymn in honour of Apollo . Tell him , Cebes , he replied , what is the truth -- that I had no idea of rivalling him or his poems ; to do so , as I knew , would be no easy task . But I wanted to see whether I could purge away a scruple which I felt about the meaning of certain dreams . In the course of my life I have often had intimations in dreams 'that I should compose music . ' The same dream came to me sometimes in one form , and sometimes in another , but always saying the same or nearly the same words : 'Cultivate and make music , ' said the dream . And hitherto I had imagined that this was only intended to exhort and encourage me in the study of philosophy , which has been the pursuit of my life , and is the noblest and best of music . The dream was bidding me do what I was already doing , in the same way that the competitor in a race is bidden by the spectators to run when he is already running . But I was not certain of this , for the dream might have meant music in the popular sense of the word , and being under sentence of death , and the festival giving me a respite , I thought that it would be safer for me to satisfy the scruple , and , in obedience to the dream , to compose a few verses before I departed . And first I made a hymn in honour of the god of the festival , and then considering that a poet , if he is really to be a poet , should not only put together words , but should invent stories , and that I have no invention , I took some fables of Aesop , which I had ready at hand and which I knew -- they were the first I came upon -- and turned them into verse . Tell this to Evenus , Cebes , and bid him be of good cheer ; say that I would have him come after me if he be a wise man , and not tarry ; and that to-day I am likely to be going , for the Athenians say that I must . Simmias said : What a message for such a man ! having been a frequent companion of his I should say that , as far as I know him , he will never take your advice unless he is obliged . Why , said Socrates , -- is not Evenus a philosopher ? I think that he is , said Simmias . Then he , or any man who has the spirit of philosophy , will be willing to die , but he will not take his own life , for that is held to be unlawful . Here he changed his position , and put his legs off the couch on to the ground , and during the rest of the conversation he remained sitting . Why do you say , enquired Cebes , that a man ought not to take his own life , but that the philosopher will be ready to follow the dying ? Socrates replied : And have you , Cebes and Simmias , who are the disciples of Philolaus , never heard him speak of this ? Yes , but his language was obscure , Socrates . My words , too , are only an echo ; but there is no reason why I should not repeat what I have heard : and indeed , as I am going to another place , it is very meet for me to be thinking and talking of the nature of the pilgrimage which I am about to make . What can I do better in the interval between this and the setting of the sun ? Then tell me , Socrates , why is suicide held to be unlawful ? as I have certainly heard Philolaus , about whom you were just now asking , affirm when he was staying with us at Thebes : and there are others who say the same , although I have never understood what was meant by any of them . Do not lose heart , replied Socrates , and the day may come when you will understand . I suppose that you wonder why , when other things which are evil may be good at certain times and to certain persons , death is to be the only exception , and why , when a man is better dead , he is not permitted to be his own benefactor , but must wait for the hand of another . Very true , said Cebes , laughing gently and speaking in his native Boeotian . I admit the appearance of inconsistency in what I am saying ; but there may not be any real inconsistency after all . There is a doctrine whispered in secret that man is a prisoner who has no right to open the door and run away ; this is a great mystery which I do not quite understand . Yet I too believe that the gods are our guardians , and that we are a possession of theirs . Do you not agree ? Yes , I quite agree , said Cebes . And if one of your own possessions , an ox or an ass , for example , took the liberty of putting himself out of the way when you had given no intimation of your wish that he should die , would you not be angry with him , and would you not punish him if you could ? Certainly , replied Cebes . Then , if we look at the matter thus , there may be reason in saying that a man should wait , and not take his own life until God summons him , as he is now summoning me . Yes , Socrates , said Cebes , there seems to be truth in what you say . And yet how can you reconcile this seemingly true belief that God is our guardian and we his possessions , with the willingness to die which we were just now attributing to the philosopher ? That the wisest of men should be willing to leave a service in which they are ruled by the gods who are the best of rulers , is not reasonable ; for surely no wise man thinks that when set at liberty he can take better care of himself than the gods take of him . A fool may perhaps think so -- he may argue that he had better run away from his master , not considering that his duty is to remain to the end , and not to run away from the good , and that there would be no sense in his running away . The wise man will want to be ever with him who is better than himself . Now this , Socrates , is the reverse of what was just now said ; for upon this view the wise man should sorrow and the fool rejoice at passing out of life . The earnestness of Cebes seemed to please Socrates . Here , said he , turning to us , is a man who is always inquiring , and is not so easily convinced by the first thing which he hears . And certainly , added Simmias , the objection which he is now making does appear to me to have some force . For what can be the meaning of a truly wise man wanting to fly away and lightly leave a master who is better than himself ? And I rather imagine that Cebes is referring to you ; he thinks that you are too ready to leave us , and too ready to leave the gods whom you acknowledge to be our good masters . Yes , replied Socrates ; there is reason in what you say . And so you think that I ought to answer your indictment as if I were in a court ? We should like you to do so , said Simmias . Then I must try to make a more successful defence before you than I did when before the judges . For I am quite ready to admit , Simmias and Cebes , that I ought to be grieved at death , if I were not persuaded in the first place that I am going to other gods who are wise and good ( of which I am as certain as I can be of any such matters ) , and secondly ( though I am not so sure of this last ) to men departed , better than those whom I leave behind ; and therefore I do not grieve as I might have done , for I have good hope that there is yet something remaining for the dead , and as has been said of old , some far better thing for the good than for the evil . But do you mean to take away your thoughts with you , Socrates ? said Simmias . Will you not impart them to us ? -- for they are a benefit in which we too are entitled to share . Moreover , if you succeed in convincing us , that will be an answer to the charge against yourself . I will do my best , replied Socrates . But you must first let me hear what Crito wants ; he has long been wishing to say something to me . Only this , Socrates , replied Crito : -- the attendant who is to give you the poison has been telling me , and he wants me to tell you , that you are not to talk much , talking , he says , increases heat , and this is apt to interfere with the action of the poison ; persons who excite themselves are sometimes obliged to take a second or even a third dose . Then , said Socrates , let him mind his business and be prepared to give the poison twice or even thrice if necessary ; that is all . I knew quite well what you would say , replied Crito ; but I was obliged to satisfy him . Never mind him , he said . And now , O my judges , I desire to prove to you that the real philosopher has reason to be of good cheer when he is about to die , and that after death he may hope to obtain the greatest good in the other world . And how this may be , Simmias and Cebes , I will endeavour to explain . For I deem that the true votary of philosophy is likely to be misunderstood by other