numbers , has every number even , without being evenness . Do you agree ? Of course . Then now mark the point at which I am aiming : -- not only do essential opposites exclude one another , but also concrete things , which , although not in themselves opposed , contain opposites ; these , I say , likewise reject the idea which is opposed to that which is contained in them , and when it approaches them they either perish or withdraw . For example ; Will not the number three endure annihilation or anything sooner than be converted into an even number , while remaining three ? Very true , said Cebes . And yet , he said , the number two is certainly not opposed to the number three ? It is not . Then not only do opposite ideas repel the advance of one another , but also there are other natures which repel the approach of opposites . Very true , he said . Suppose , he said , that we endeavour , if possible , to determine what these are . By all means . Are they not , Cebes , such as compel the things of which they have possession , not only to take their own form , but also the form of some opposite ? What do you mean ? I mean , as I was just now saying , and as I am sure that you know , that those things which are possessed by the number three must not only be three in number , but must also be odd . Quite true . And on this oddness , of which the number three has the impress , the opposite idea will never intrude ? No . And this impress was given by the odd principle ? Yes . And to the odd is opposed the even ? True . Then the idea of the even number will never arrive at three ? No . Then three has no part in the even ? None . Then the triad or number three is uneven ? Very true . To return then to my distinction of natures which are not opposed , and yet do not admit opposites -- as , in the instance given , three , although not opposed to the even , does not any the more admit of the even , but always brings the opposite into play on the other side ; or as two does not receive the odd , or fire the cold -- from these examples ( and there are many more of them ) perhaps you may be able to arrive at the general conclusion , that not only opposites will not receive opposites , but also that nothing which brings the opposite will admit the opposite of that which it brings , in that to which it is brought . And here let me recapitulate -- for there is no harm in repetition . The number five will not admit the nature of the even , any more than ten , which is the double of five , will admit the nature of the odd . The double has another opposite , and is not strictly opposed to the odd , but nevertheless rejects the odd altogether . Nor again will parts in the ratio 3:2 , nor any fraction in which there is a half , nor again in which there is a third , admit the notion of the whole , although they are not opposed to the whole : You will agree ? Yes , he said , I entirely agree and go along with you in that . And now , he said , let us begin again ; and do not you answer my question in the words in which I ask it : let me have not the old safe answer of which I spoke at first , but another equally safe , of which the truth will be inferred by you from what has been just said . I mean that if any one asks you 'what that is , of which the inherence makes the body hot , ' you will reply not heat ( this is what I call the safe and stupid answer ) , but fire , a far superior answer , which we are now in a condition to give . Or if any one asks you 'why a body is diseased , ' you will not say from disease , but from fever ; and instead of saying that oddness is the cause of odd numbers , you will say that the monad is the cause of them : and so of things in general , as I dare say that you will understand sufficiently without my adducing any further examples . Yes , he said , I quite understand you . Tell me , then , what is that of which the inherence will render the body alive ? The soul , he replied . And is this always the case ? Yes , he said , of course . Then whatever the soul possesses , to that she comes bearing life ? Yes , certainly . And is there any opposite to life ? There is , he said . And what is that ? Death . Then the soul , as has been acknowledged , will never receive the opposite of what she brings . Impossible , replied Cebes . And now , he said , what did we just now call that principle which repels the even ? The odd . And that principle which repels the musical , or the just ? The unmusical , he said , and the unjust . And what do we call the principle which does not admit of death ? The immortal , he said . And does the soul admit of death ? No . Then the soul is immortal ? Yes , he said . And may we say that this has been proven ? Yes , abundantly proven , Socrates , he replied . Supposing that the odd were imperishable , must not three be imperishable ? Of course . And if that which is cold were imperishable , when the warm principle came attacking the snow , must not the snow have retired whole and unmelted -- for it could never have perished , nor could it have remained and admitted the heat ? True , he said . Again , if the uncooling or warm principle were imperishable , the fire when assailed by cold would not have perished or have been extinguished , but would have gone away unaffected ? Certainly , he said . And the same may be said of the immortal : if the immortal is also imperishable , the soul when attacked by death can not perish ; for the preceding argument shows that the soul will not admit of death , or ever be dead , any more than three or the odd number will admit of the even , or fire or the heat in the fire , of the cold . Yet a person may say : 'But although the odd will not become even at the approach of the even , why may not the odd perish and the even take the place of the odd ? ' Now to him who makes this objection , we can not answer that the odd principle is imperishable ; for this has not been acknowledged , but if this had been acknowledged , there would have been no difficulty in contending that at the approach of the even the odd principle and the number three took their departure ; and the same argument would have held good of fire and heat and any other thing . Very true . And the same may be said of the immortal : if the immortal is also imperishable , then the soul will be imperishable as well as immortal ; but if not , some other proof of her imperishableness will have to be given . No other proof is needed , he said ; for if the immortal , being eternal , is liable to perish , then nothing is imperishable . Yes , replied Socrates , and yet all men will agree that God , and the essential form of life , and the immortal in general , will never perish . Yes , all men , he said -- that is true ; and what is more , gods , if I am not mistaken , as well as men . Seeing then that the immortal is indestructible , must not the soul , if she is immortal , be also imperishable ? Most certainly . Then when death attacks a man , the mortal portion of him may be supposed to die , but the immortal retires at the approach of death and is preserved safe and sound ? True . Then , Cebes , beyond question , the soul is immortal and imperishable , and our souls will truly exist in another world ! I am convinced , Socrates , said Cebes , and have nothing more to object ; but if my friend Simmias , or any one else , has any further objection to make , he had better speak out , and not keep silence , since I do not know to what other season he can defer the discussion , if there is anything which he wants to say or to have said . But I have nothing more to say , replied Simmias ; nor can I see any reason for doubt after what has been said . But I still feel and can not help feeling uncertain in my own mind , when I think of the greatness of the subject and the feebleness of man . Yes , Simmias , replied Socrates , that is well said : and I may add that first principles , even if they appear certain , should be carefully considered ; and when they are satisfactorily ascertained , then , with a sort of hesitating confidence in human reason , you may , I think , follow the course of the argument ; and if that be plain and clear , there will be no need for any further enquiry . Very true . But then , O my friends , he said , if the soul is really immortal , what care should be taken of her , not only in respect of the portion of time which is called life , but of eternity ! And the danger of neglecting her from this point of view does indeed appear to be awful . If death had only been the end of all , the wicked would have had a good bargain in dying , for they would have been happily quit not only of their body , but of their own evil together with their souls . But now , inasmuch as the soul is manifestly immortal , there is no release or salvation from evil except the attainment of the highest virtue and wisdom . For the soul when on her progress to the world below takes nothing with her but nurture and education ; and these are said greatly to benefit or greatly to injure the departed , at the very beginning of his journey thither . For after death , as they say , the genius of each individual , to whom he belonged in life , leads him to a certain place in which the dead are gathered together , whence after judgment has been given they pass into the world below , following the guide , who is appointed to conduct them from this world to the other : and when they have there received their due and remained their time , another guide brings them back again after many revolutions of ages . Now this way to the other world is not , as Aeschylus says in the Telephus , a single and straight path -- if that were so no guide would be needed , for no one could miss it ; but there are many partings of the road , and windings , as I infer from the rites and sacrifices which are offered to the gods below in places where three ways meet on earth . The wise and orderly soul follows in the straight path and is conscious of her surroundings ; but the soul which desires the body , and which , as I was relating before , has long been fluttering about the lifeless frame and the world of sight , is after many struggles and many sufferings hardly and with violence carried away by her attendant genius , and when she arrives at the place where the other souls are gathered , if she be impure and have done impure deeds , whether foul murders or other crimes which are the brothers of these , and the works of brothers in crime -- from that soul every one flees and turns away ; no one will be her companion , no one her guide , but alone she wanders in extremity of evil until certain times are fulfilled , and when they are fulfilled , she is borne irresistibly to her own fitting habitation ; as every pure and just soul which has passed through life in the company and under the guidance of the gods has also her own proper home . Now the earth has divers wonderful regions , and is indeed in nature and extent very unlike the notions of geographers , as I believe on the authority of one who shall be nameless . What do you mean , Socrates ? said Simmias . I have myself heard many descriptions of the earth , but I do not know , and I should very much like to know , in which of these you put faith . And I , Simmias , replied Socrates , if I had the art of Glaucus would tell you ; although I know not that the art of Glaucus could prove the truth of my tale , which I myself should never be able to prove , and even if I could , I fear , Simmias , that my life would come to an end before the argument was completed . I may describe to you , however , the form and regions of the earth according to my conception of them . That , said Simmias , will be enough . Well , then , he said , my conviction is , that the earth is a round body in the centre of the heavens , and therefore has no need of air or any similar force to be a support , but is kept there and hindered from falling or inclining any way by the equability of the surrounding heaven and by her own equipoise . For that which , being in equipoise , is in the centre of that which is equably diffused , will not incline any way in any degree , but will always remain in the same state and not deviate . And this is my first notion . Which is surely a correct one , said Simmias . Also I believe that the earth is very vast , and that we who dwell in the region extending from the river Phasis to the Pillars of Heracles inhabit a small portion only about the sea , like ants or frogs about a marsh , and that there are other inhabitants of many other like places ; for everywhere on the face of the earth there are hollows of various forms and sizes , into which the water and the mist and the lower air collect . But the true earth is pure and situated in the pure heaven -- there are the stars also ; and it is the heaven which is commonly spoken of by us as the ether , and of which our own earth is the sediment gathering in the hollows beneath . But we who live in these hollows are deceived into the notion that we are dwelling above on the surface of the earth ; which is just as if a creature who was at the bottom of the sea were to fancy that he was on the surface of the water , and that the sea was the heaven through which he saw the sun and the other stars , he having never come to the surface by reason of his feebleness and sluggishness , and having never lifted up his head and seen , nor ever heard from one who had seen , how much purer and fairer the world above is than his own . And such is exactly our case : for we are dwelling in a hollow of the earth , and fancy that we are on the surface ; and the air we call the heaven , in which we imagine that the stars move . But the fact is , that owing to our feebleness and sluggishness we are prevented from reaching the surface of the air : for if any man could arrive at the exterior limit , or take the wings of a bird and come to the top , then like a fish who puts his head out of the water and sees this world , he would see a world beyond ; and , if the nature of man could sustain the sight , he would acknowledge that this other world was the place of the true heaven and the true light and the true earth . For our earth , and the stones , and the entire region which surrounds us , are spoilt and corroded , as in the sea all things are corroded by the brine , neither is there any noble or perfect growth , but caverns only , and sand , and an endless slough of mud : and even the shore is not to be compared to the fairer sights of this world . And still less is this our world to be compared with the other . Of that upper earth which is under the heaven , I can tell you a charming tale , Simmias , which is well worth hearing . And we , Socrates , replied Simmias , shall be charmed to listen to you . The tale , my friend , he said , is as follows : -- In the first place , the earth , when looked at from above , is in appearance streaked like one of those balls which have leather coverings in twelve pieces , and is decked with various colours , of which the colours used by painters on earth are in a manner samples . But there the whole earth is made up of them , and they are brighter far and clearer than ours ; there is a purple of wonderful lustre , also the radiance of gold , and the white which is in the earth is whiter than any chalk or snow . Of these and other colours the earth is made up , and they are more in number and fairer than the eye of man has ever seen ; the very hollows ( of which I was speaking ) filled with air and water have a colour of their own , and are seen like light gleaming amid the diversity of the other colours , so that the whole presents a single and continuous appearance of variety in unity . And in this fair region everything that grows -- trees , and flowers , and fruits -- are in a like degree fairer than any here ; and there are hills , having stones in them in a like degree smoother , and more transparent , and fairer in colour than our highly-valued emeralds and sardonyxes and jaspers , and other gems , which are but minute fragments of them : for there all the stones are like our precious stones , and fairer still ( compare Republic ) . The reason is , that they are pure , and not , like our precious stones , infected or corroded by the corrupt briny elements which coagulate among us , and which breed foulness and disease both in earth and stones , as well as in animals and plants . They are the jewels of the upper earth , which also shines with gold and silver and the like , and they are set in the light of day and are large and abundant and in all places , making the earth a sight to gladden the beholder 's eye . And there are animals and men , some in a middle region , others dwelling about the air as we dwell about the sea ; others in islands which the air flows round , near the continent : and in a word , the air is used by them as the water and the sea are by us , and the ether is to them what the air is to us . Moreover , the temperament of their seasons is such that they have no disease , and live much longer than we do , and have sight and hearing and smell , and all the other senses , in far greater perfection , in the same proportion that air is purer than water or the ether than air . Also they have temples and sacred places in which the gods really dwell , and they hear their voices and receive their answers , and are conscious of them and hold converse with them , and they see the sun , moon , and stars as they truly are , and their other blessedness is of a piece with this . Such is the nature of the whole earth , and of the things which are around the earth ; and there are divers regions in the hollows on the face of the globe everywhere , some of them deeper and more extended than that which we inhabit , others deeper but with a narrower opening than ours , and some are shallower and also wider . All have numerous perforations , and there are passages broad and narrow in the interior of the earth , connecting them with one another ; and there flows out of and into them , as into basins , a vast tide of water , and huge subterranean streams of perennial rivers , and springs hot and cold , and a great fire , and great rivers of fire , and streams of liquid mud , thin or thick ( like the rivers of mud in Sicily , and the lava streams which follow them ) , and the regions about which they happen to flow are filled up with them . And there is a swinging or see-saw in the interior of the earth which moves all this up and down , and is due to the following cause : -- There is a chasm which is the vastest of them all , and pierces right through the whole earth ; this is that chasm which Homer describes in the words , -- 'Far off , where is the inmost depth beneath the earth ; ' and which he in other places , and many other poets , have called Tartarus . And the see-saw is caused by the streams flowing into and out of this chasm , and they each have the nature of the soil through which they flow . And the reason why the streams are always flowing in and out , is that the watery element has no bed or bottom , but is swinging and surging up and down , and the surrounding wind and air do the same ; they follow the water up and down , hither and thither , over the earth -- just as in the act of respiration the air is always in process of inhalation and exhalation ; -- and the wind swinging with the water in and out produces fearful and irresistible blasts : when the waters retire with a rush into the lower parts of the earth , as they are called , they flow through the earth in those regions , and fill them up like water raised by a pump , and then when they leave those regions and rush back hither , they again fill the hollows here , and when these are filled , flow through subterranean channels and find their way to their several places , forming seas , and lakes , and rivers , and springs . Thence they again enter the earth , some of them making a long circuit into many lands , others going to a few places and not so distant ; and again fall into Tartarus , some at a point a good deal lower than that at which they rose , and others not much lower , but all in some degree lower than the point from which they came . And some burst forth again on the opposite side , and some on the same side , and some wind round the earth with one or many folds like the coils of a serpent , and descend as far as they can , but always return and fall into the chasm . The rivers flowing in either direction can descend only to the centre and no further , for opposite to the rivers is a precipice . Now these rivers are many , and mighty , and diverse , and there are four principal ones , of which the greatest and outermost is that called Oceanus , which flows round the earth in a circle ; and in the opposite direction flows Acheron , which passes under the earth through desert places into the Acherusian lake : this is the lake to the shores of which the souls of the many go when they are dead , and after waiting an appointed time , which is to some a longer and to some a shorter time , they are sent back to be born again as animals . The third river passes out between the two , and near the place of outlet pours into a vast region of fire , and forms a lake larger than the Mediterranean Sea , boiling with water and mud ; and proceeding muddy and turbid , and winding about the earth , comes , among other places , to the extremities of the Acherusian Lake , but mingles not with the waters of the lake , and after making many coils about the earth plunges into Tartarus at a deeper level . This is that Pyriphlegethon , as the stream is called , which throws up jets of fire in different parts of the earth . The fourth river goes out on the opposite side , and falls first of all into a wild and savage region , which is all of a dark-blue colour , like lapis lazuli ; and this is that river which is called the Stygian river , and falls into and forms the Lake Styx , and after falling into the lake and receiving strange powers in the waters , passes under the earth , winding round in the opposite direction , and comes near the Acherusian lake from the opposite side to Pyriphlegethon . And the water of this river too mingles with no other , but flows round in a circle and falls into Tartarus over against Pyriphlegethon ; and the name of the river , as the poets say , is Cocytus . Such is the nature of the other world ; and when the dead arrive at the place to which the genius of each severally guides them , first of all , they have sentence passed upon them , as they have lived well and piously or not . And those who appear to have lived neither well nor ill , go to the river Acheron , and embarking in any vessels which they may find , are carried in them to the lake , and there they dwell and are purified of their evil deeds , and having suffered the penalty of the wrongs which they have done to others , they are absolved , and receive the rewards of their good deeds , each of them according to his deserts . But those who appear to be incurable by reason of the greatness of their crimes -- who have committed many and terrible deeds of sacrilege , murders foul and violent , or the like -- such are hurled into Tartarus which is their suitable destiny , and they never come out . Those again who have committed crimes , which , although great , are not irremediable -- who in a moment of anger , for example , have done violence to a father or a mother , and have repented for the remainder of their lives , or , who have taken the life of another under the like extenuating circumstances -- these are plunged into Tartarus , the pains of which they are compelled to undergo for a year , but at the end of the year the wave casts them forth -- mere homicides by way of Cocytus , parricides and matricides by Pyriphlegethon -- and they are borne to the Acherusian lake , and there they lift up their voices and call upon the victims whom they have slain or wronged , to have pity on them , and to be kind to them , and let them come out into the lake . And if they prevail , then they come forth and cease from their troubles ; but if not , they are carried back again into Tartarus and from thence into the rivers unceasingly , until they obtain mercy from those whom they have wronged : for that is the sentence inflicted upon them by their judges . Those too who have been pre-eminent for holiness of life are released from this earthly prison , and go to their pure home which is above , and dwell in the purer earth ; and of these , such as have duly purified themselves with philosophy live henceforth altogether without the body , in mansions fairer still which may not be described , and of which the time would fail me to tell . Wherefore , Simmias , seeing all these things , what ought not we to do that we may obtain virtue and wisdom in this life ? Fair is the prize , and the hope great ! A man of sense ought not to say , nor will I be very confident , that the description which I have given of the soul and her mansions is exactly true . But I do say that , inasmuch as the soul is shown to be immortal , he may venture to think , not improperly or unworthily , that something of the kind is true . The venture is a glorious one , and he ought to comfort himself with words like these , which is the reason why I lengthen out the tale . Wherefore , I say , let a man be of good cheer about his soul , who having cast away the pleasures and ornaments of the body as alien to him and working harm rather than good , has sought after the pleasures of knowledge ; and has arrayed the soul , not in some foreign attire , but in her own proper jewels , temperance , and justice , and courage , and nobility , and truth -- in these adorned she is ready to go on her journey to the world below , when her hour comes . You , Simmias and Cebes , and all other men , will depart at some time or other . Me already , as the tragic poet would say , the voice of fate calls . Soon I must drink the poison ; and I think that I had better repair to the bath first , in order that the women may not have the trouble of washing my body after I am dead . When he had done speaking , Crito said : And have you any commands for us , Socrates -- anything to say about your children , or any other matter in which we can serve you ? Nothing particular , Crito , he replied : only , as I have always told you , take care of yourselves ; that is a service which you may be ever rendering to me and mine and to all of us , whether you promise to do so or not . But if you have no thought for yourselves , and care not to walk according to the rule which I have prescribed for you , not now for the first time , however much you may profess or promise at the moment , it will be of no avail . We will do our best , said Crito : And in what way shall we bury you ? In any way that you like ; but you must get hold of me , and take care that I do not run away from you . Then he turned to us , and added with a smile : -- I can not make Crito believe that I am the same Socrates who have been talking and conducting the argument ; he fancies that I am the other Socrates whom he will soon see , a dead body -- and he asks , How shall he bury me ? And though I have spoken many words in the endeavour to show that when I have drunk the poison I shall leave you and go to the joys of the blessed , -- these words of mine , with which I was comforting you and myself , have had , as I perceive , no effect upon Crito . And therefore I want you to be surety for me to him now , as at the trial he was surety to the judges for me : but let the promise be of another sort ; for he was surety for me to the judges that I would remain , and you must be my surety to him that I shall not remain , but go away and depart ; and then he will suffer less at my death , and not be grieved when he sees my body being burned or buried . I would not have him sorrow at my hard lot , or say at the burial , Thus we lay out Socrates , or , Thus we follow him to the grave or bury him ; for false words are not only evil in themselves , but they infect the soul with evil . Be of good cheer , then , my dear Crito , and say that you are burying my body only , and do with that whatever is usual , and what you think best . When he had spoken these words , he arose and went into a chamber to bathe ; Crito followed him and told us to wait . So we remained behind , talking and thinking of the subject of discourse , and also of the greatness of our sorrow ; he was like a father of whom we were being bereaved , and we were about to pass the rest of our lives as orphans . When he had taken the bath his children were brought to him -- ( he had two young sons and an elder one ) ; and the women of his family also came , and he talked to them and gave them a few directions in the presence of Crito ; then he dismissed them and returned to us . Now the hour of sunset was near , for a good deal of time had passed while he was within . When he came out , he sat down with us again after his bath , but not much was said . Soon the jailer , who was the servant of the Eleven , entered and stood by him , saying : -- To you , Socrates , whom I know to be the noblest and gentlest and best of all who ever came to this place , I will not impute the angry feelings of other men , who rage and swear at me , when , in obedience to the authorities , I bid them drink the poison -- indeed , I am sure that you will not be angry with me ; for others , as you are aware , and not I , are to blame . And so fare you well , and try to bear lightly what must needs be -- you know my errand . Then bursting into tears he turned away and went out . Socrates looked at him and said : I return your good wishes , and will do as you bid . Then turning to us , he said , How charming the man is : since I have been in prison he has always been coming to see me , and at times he would talk to me , and was as good to me as could be , and now see how generously he sorrows on my account . We must do as he says , Crito ; and therefore let the cup be brought , if the poison is prepared : if not , let the attendant prepare some . Yet , said Crito , the sun is still upon the hill-tops , and I know that many a one has taken the draught late , and after the announcement has been made to him , he has eaten and drunk , and enjoyed the society of his beloved ; do not hurry -- there is time enough . Socrates said : Yes , Crito , and they of whom you speak are right in so acting , for they think that they will be gainers by the delay ; but I am right in not following their example , for I do not think that I should gain anything by drinking the poison a little later ; I should only be ridiculous in my own eyes for sparing and saving a life which is already forfeit . Please then to do as I say , and not to refuse me . Crito made a sign to the servant , who was standing by ; and he went out , and having been absent for some time , returned with the jailer carrying the cup of poison . Socrates said : You , my good friend , who are experienced in these matters , shall give me directions how I am to proceed . The man answered : You have only to walk about until your legs are heavy , and then to lie down , and the poison will act . At the same time he handed the cup to Socrates , who in the easiest and gentlest manner , without the least fear or change of colour or feature , looking at the man with all his eyes , Echecrates , as his manner was , took the cup and said : What do you say about making a libation out of this cup to any god ? May I , or not ? The man answered : We only prepare , Socrates , just so much as we deem enough . I understand , he said : but I may and must ask the gods to prosper my journey from this to the other world -- even so -- and so be it according to my prayer . Then raising the cup to his lips , quite readily and cheerfully he drank off the poison . And hitherto most of us had been able to control our sorrow ; but now when we saw him drinking , and saw too that he had finished the draught , we could no longer forbear , and in spite of myself my own tears were flowing fast ; so that I covered my face and wept , not for him , but at the thought of my own calamity in having to part from such a friend . Nor was I the first ; for Crito , when he found himself unable to restrain his tears , had got up , and I followed ; and at that moment , Apollodorus , who had been weeping all the time , broke out in a loud and passionate cry which made cowards of us all . Socrates alone retained his calmness : What is this strange outcry ? he said . I sent away the women mainly in order that they might not misbehave in this way , for I have been told that a man should die in peace . Be quiet , then , and have patience . When we heard his words we were ashamed , and refrained our tears ; and he walked about until , as he said , his legs began to fail , and then he lay on his back , according to the directions , and the man who gave him the poison now and then looked at his feet and legs ; and after a while he pressed his foot hard , and asked him if he could feel ; and he said , No ; and then his leg , and so upwards and upwards , and showed us that he was cold and stiff . And he felt them himself , and said : When the poison reaches the heart , that will be the end . He was beginning to grow cold about the groin , when he uncovered his face , for he had covered himself up , and said -- they were his last words -- he said : Crito , I owe a cock to Asclepius ; will you remember to pay the debt ? The debt shall be paid , said Crito ; is there anything else ? There was no answer to this question ; but in a minute or two a movement was heard , and the attendants uncovered him ; his eyes were set , and Crito closed his eyes and mouth . Such was the end , Echecrates , of our friend ; concerning whom I may truly say , that of all the men of his time whom I have known , he was the wisest and justest and best . * * * END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PHAEDO * * * Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed . Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works , so the Foundation ( and you ! ) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties . Special rules , set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license , apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark . Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark , and may not be used if you charge for an eBook , except by following the terms of the trademark license , including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark . If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook , complying with the trademark license is very easy . You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works , reports , performances and research . Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law . Redistribution is subject to the trademark license , especially commercial redistribution . START : FULL LICENSE THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works , by using or distributing this work ( or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “ Project Gutenberg ” ) , you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license . Section 1 . General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works 1.A . By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work , you indicate that you have read , understand , agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property ( trademark/copyright ) agreement . If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement , you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession . If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement , you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8 . 1.B . “ Project Gutenberg ” is a registered trademark . It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement . There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement . See paragraph 1.C below . There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic works . See paragraph 1.E below . 1.C . The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ( “ the Foundation ” or PGLAF ) , owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works . Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States . If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States , we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying , distributing , performing , displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed . Of course , we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work . You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you share it without charge with others . 1.D . The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work . Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change . If you are outside the United States , check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading , copying , displaying , performing , distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work . The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States . 1.E . Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg : 1.E.1 . The following sentence , with active links to , or other immediate access to , the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work ( any work on which the phrase “ Project Gutenberg ” appears , or with which the phrase “ Project Gutenberg ” is associated ) is accessed , displayed , performed , viewed , copied or distributed : This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever . You may copy it , give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org . If you are not located in the United States , you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook . 1.E.2 . If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law ( does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder ) , the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges . If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “ Project Gutenberg ” associated with or appearing on the work , you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™ trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9 . 1.E.3 . If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the permission of the copyright holder , your use and distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder . Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work . 1.E.4 . Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License terms from this work , or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™ . 1.E.5 . Do not copy , display , perform , distribute or redistribute this electronic work , or any part of this electronic work , without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License . 1.E.6 . You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary , compressed , marked up , nonproprietary or proprietary form , including any word processing or hypertext form . However , if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than “ Plain Vanilla ASCII ” or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website ( www.gutenberg.org ) , you must , at no additional cost , fee or expense to the user , provide a copy , a means of exporting a copy , or a means of obtaining a copy upon request , of the work in its original “ Plain Vanilla ASCII ” or other form . Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1 . 1.E.7 . Do not charge a fee for access to , viewing , displaying , performing , copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9 . 1.E.8 . You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that : • You pay a royalty fee of 20 % of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes . The fee is owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark , but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation . Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare ( or are legally required to prepare ) your periodic tax returns . Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4 , “ Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. ” • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in writing ( or by e-mail ) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License . You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works . • You provide , in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3 , a full refund of any money paid for a work or a replacement copy , if a defect in the electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of receipt of the work . • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works . 1.E.9 . If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement , you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation , the manager of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark . Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below . 1.F . 1.F.1 . Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify , do copyright research on , transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection . Despite these efforts , Project Gutenberg™ electronic works , and the medium on which they may be stored , may contain “ Defects , ” such as , but not limited to , incomplete , inaccurate or corrupt data , transcription errors , a copyright or other intellectual property infringement , a defective or damaged disk or other medium , a computer virus , or computer codes that damage or can not be read by your equipment . 1.F.2 . LIMITED WARRANTY , DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “ Right of Replacement or Refund ” described in paragraph 1.F.3 , the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation , the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark , and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement , disclaim all liability to you for damages , costs and expenses , including legal fees . YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE , STRICT LIABILITY , BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3 . YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION , THE TRADEMARK OWNER , AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL , DIRECT , INDIRECT , CONSEQUENTIAL , PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE . 1.F.3 . LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it , you can receive a refund of the money ( if any ) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from . If you received the work on a physical medium , you must return the medium with your written explanation . The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund . If you received the work electronically , the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund . If the second copy is also defective , you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem . 1.F.4 . Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in paragraph 1.F.3 , this work is provided to you ‘ AS-IS ’ , WITH NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND , EXPRESS OR IMPLIED , INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE . 1.F.5 . Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages . If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement , the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law . The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions . 1.F.6 . INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation , the trademark owner , any agent or employee of the Foundation , anyone providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement , and any volunteers associated with the production , promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works , harmless from all liability , costs and expenses , including legal fees , that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur : ( a ) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg™ work , ( b ) alteration , modification , or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work , and ( c ) any Defect you cause . Section 2 . Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™ Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete , old , middle-aged and new computers . It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life . Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™ ’ s goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for generations to come . In 2001 , the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations . To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help , see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org . Section 3 . Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service . The Foundation ’ s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541 . Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state ’ s laws . The Foundation ’ s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West , Salt Lake City , UT 84116 , ( 801 ) 596-1887 . Email contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the Foundation ’ s website and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact Section 4 . Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and can not survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment . Many small donations ( $ 1 to $ 5,000 ) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS . The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States . Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort , much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements . We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance . To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate . While we can not and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements , we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate . International donations are gratefully accepted , but we can not make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States . U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff . Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses . Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks , online payments and credit card donations . To donate , please visit : www.gutenberg.org/donate . Section 5 . General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone . For forty years , he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support . Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions , all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included . Thus , we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition . Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility : www.gutenberg.org . This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™ , including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation , how to help produce our new eBooks , and how to subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new