; she will not ask philosophy to release her in order that when released she may deliver herself up again to the thraldom of pleasures and pains , doing a work only to be undone again , weaving instead of unweaving her Penelope 's web . But she will calm passion , and follow reason , and dwell in the contemplation of her , beholding the true and divine ( which is not matter of opinion ) , and thence deriving nourishment . Thus she seeks to live while she lives , and after death she hopes to go to her own kindred and to that which is like her , and to be freed from human ills . Never fear , Simmias and Cebes , that a soul which has been thus nurtured and has had these pursuits , will at her departure from the body be scattered and blown away by the winds and be nowhere and nothing . When Socrates had done speaking , for a considerable time there was silence ; he himself appeared to be meditating , as most of us were , on what had been said ; only Cebes and Simmias spoke a few words to one another . And Socrates observing them asked what they thought of the argument , and whether there was anything wanting ? For , said he , there are many points still open to suspicion and attack , if any one were disposed to sift the matter thoroughly . Should you be considering some other matter I say no more , but if you are still in doubt do not hesitate to say exactly what you think , and let us have anything better which you can suggest ; and if you think that I can be of any use , allow me to help you . Simmias said : I must confess , Socrates , that doubts did arise in our minds , and each of us was urging and inciting the other to put the question which we wanted to have answered and which neither of us liked to ask , fearing that our importunity might be troublesome under present at such a time . Socrates replied with a smile : O Simmias , what are you saying ? I am not very likely to persuade other men that I do not regard my present situation as a misfortune , if I can not even persuade you that I am no worse off now than at any other time in my life . Will you not allow that I have as much of the spirit of prophecy in me as the swans ? For they , when they perceive that they must die , having sung all their life long , do then sing more lustily than ever , rejoicing in the thought that they are about to go away to the god whose ministers they are . But men , because they are themselves afraid of death , slanderously affirm of the swans that they sing a lament at the last , not considering that no bird sings when cold , or hungry , or in pain , not even the nightingale , nor the swallow , nor yet the hoopoe ; which are said indeed to tune a lay of sorrow , although I do not believe this to be true of them any more than of the swans . But because they are sacred to Apollo , they have the gift of prophecy , and anticipate the good things of another world , wherefore they sing and rejoice in that day more than they ever did before . And I too , believing myself to be the consecrated servant of the same God , and the fellow-servant of the swans , and thinking that I have received from my master gifts of prophecy which are not inferior to theirs , would not go out of life less merrily than the swans . Never mind then , if this be your only objection , but speak and ask anything which you like , while the eleven magistrates of Athens allow . Very good , Socrates , said Simmias ; then I will tell you my difficulty , and Cebes will tell you his . I feel myself , ( and I daresay that you have the same feeling ) , how hard or rather impossible is the attainment of any certainty about questions such as these in the present life . And yet I should deem him a coward who did not prove what is said about them to the uttermost , or whose heart failed him before he had examined them on every side . For he should persevere until he has achieved one of two things : either he should discover , or be taught the truth about them ; or , if this be impossible , I would have him take the best and most irrefragable of human theories , and let this be the raft upon which he sails through life -- not without risk , as I admit , if he can not find some word of God which will more surely and safely carry him . And now , as you bid me , I will venture to question you , and then I shall not have to reproach myself hereafter with not having said at the time what I think . For when I consider the matter , either alone or with Cebes , the argument does certainly appear to me , Socrates , to be not sufficient . Socrates answered : I dare say , my friend , that you may be right , but I should like to know in what respect the argument is insufficient . In this respect , replied Simmias : -- Suppose a person to use the same argument about harmony and the lyre -- might he not say that harmony is a thing invisible , incorporeal , perfect , divine , existing in the lyre which is harmonized , but that the lyre and the strings are matter and material , composite , earthy , and akin to mortality ? And when some one breaks the lyre , or cuts and rends the strings , then he who takes this view would argue as you do , and on the same analogy , that the harmony survives and has not perished -- you can not imagine , he would say , that the lyre without the strings , and the broken strings themselves which are mortal remain , and yet that the harmony , which is of heavenly and immortal nature and kindred , has perished -- perished before the mortal . The harmony must still be somewhere , and the wood and strings will decay before anything can happen to that . The thought , Socrates , must have occurred to your own mind that such is our conception of the soul ; and that when the body is in a manner strung and held together by the elements of hot and cold , wet and dry , then the soul is the harmony or due proportionate admixture of them . But if so , whenever the strings of the body are unduly loosened or overstrained through disease or other injury , then the soul , though most divine , like other harmonies of music or of works of art , of course perishes at once , although the material remains of the body may last for a considerable time , until they are either decayed or burnt . And if any one maintains that the soul , being the harmony of the elements of the body , is first to perish in that which is called death , how shall we answer him ? Socrates looked fixedly at us as his manner was , and said with a smile : Simmias has reason on his side ; and why does not some one of you who is better able than myself answer him ? for there is force in his attack upon me . But perhaps , before we answer him , we had better also hear what Cebes has to say that we may gain time for reflection , and when they have both spoken , we may either assent to them , if there is truth in what they say , or if not , we will maintain our position . Please to tell me then , Cebes , he said , what was the difficulty which troubled you ? Cebes said : I will tell you . My feeling is that the argument is where it was , and open to the same objections which were urged before ; for I am ready to admit that the existence of the soul before entering into the bodily form has been very ingeniously , and , if I may say so , quite sufficiently proven ; but the existence of the soul after death is still , in my judgment , unproven . Now my objection is not the same as that of Simmias ; for I am not disposed to deny that the soul is stronger and more lasting than the body , being of opinion that in all such respects the soul very far excels the body . Well , then , says the argument to me , why do you remain unconvinced ? -- When you see that the weaker continues in existence after the man is dead , will you not admit that the more lasting must also survive during the same period of time ? Now I will ask you to consider whether the objection , which , like Simmias , I will express in a figure , is of any weight . The analogy which I will adduce is that of an old weaver , who dies , and after his death somebody says : -- He is not dead , he must be alive ; -- see , there is the coat which he himself wove and wore , and which remains whole and undecayed . And then he proceeds to ask of some one who is incredulous , whether a man lasts longer , or the coat which is in use and wear ; and when he is answered that a man lasts far longer , thinks that he has thus certainly demonstrated the survival of the man , who is the more lasting , because the less lasting remains . But that , Simmias , as I would beg you to remark , is a mistake ; any one can see that he who talks thus is talking nonsense . For the truth is , that the weaver aforesaid , having woven and worn many such coats , outlived several of them , and was outlived by the last ; but a man is not therefore proved to be slighter and weaker than a coat . Now the relation of the body to the soul may be expressed in a similar figure ; and any one may very fairly say in like manner that the soul is lasting , and the body weak and shortlived in comparison . He may argue in like manner that every soul wears out many bodies , especially if a man live many years . While he is alive the body deliquesces and decays , and the soul always weaves another garment and repairs the waste . But of course , whenever the soul perishes , she must have on her last garment , and this will survive her ; and then at length , when the soul is dead , the body will show its native weakness , and quickly decompose and pass away . I would therefore rather not rely on the argument from superior strength to prove the continued existence of the soul after death . For granting even more than you affirm to be possible , and acknowledging not only that the soul existed before birth , but also that the souls of some exist , and will continue to exist after death , and will be born and die again and again , and that there is a natural strength in the soul which will hold out and be born many times -- nevertheless , we may be still inclined to think that she will weary in the labours of successive births , and may at last succumb in one of her deaths and utterly perish ; and this death and dissolution of the body which brings destruction to the soul may be unknown to any of us , for no one of us can have had any experience of it : and if so , then I maintain that he who is confident about death has but a foolish confidence , unless he is able to prove that the soul is altogether immortal and imperishable . But if he can not prove the soul's immortality , he who is about to die will always have reason to fear that when the body is disunited , the soul also may utterly perish . All of us , as we afterwards remarked to one another , had an unpleasant feeling at hearing what they said . When we had been so firmly convinced before , now to have our faith shaken seemed to introduce a confusion and uncertainty , not only into the previous argument , but into any future one ; either we were incapable of forming a judgment , or there were no grounds of belief . ECHECRATES : There I feel with you -- by heaven I do , Phaedo , and when you were speaking , I was beginning to ask myself the same question : What argument can I ever trust again ? For what could be more convincing than the argument of Socrates , which has now fallen into discredit ? That the soul is a harmony is a doctrine which has always had a wonderful attraction for me , and , when mentioned , came back to me at once , as my own original conviction . And now I must begin again and find another argument which will assure me that when the man is dead the soul survives . Tell me , I implore you , how did Socrates proceed ? Did he appear to share the unpleasant feeling which you mention ? or did he calmly meet the attack ? And did he answer forcibly or feebly ? Narrate what passed as exactly as you can . PHAEDO : Often , Echecrates , I have wondered at Socrates , but never more than on that occasion . That he should be able to answer was nothing , but what astonished me was , first , the gentle and pleasant and approving manner in which he received the words of the young men , and then his quick sense of the wound which had been inflicted by the argument , and the readiness with which he healed it . He might be compared to a general rallying his defeated and broken army , urging them to accompany him and return to the field of argument . ECHECRATES : What followed ? PHAEDO : You shall hear , for I was close to him on his right hand , seated on a sort of stool , and he on a couch which was a good deal higher . He stroked my head , and pressed the hair upon my neck -- he had a way of playing with my hair ; and then he said : To-morrow , Phaedo , I suppose that these fair locks of yours will be severed . Yes , Socrates , I suppose that they will , I replied . Not so , if you will take my advice . What shall I do with them ? I said . To-day , he replied , and not to-morrow , if this argument dies and we can not bring it to life again , you and I will both shave our locks ; and if I were you , and the argument got away from me , and I could not hold my ground against Simmias and Cebes , I would myself take an oath , like the Argives , not to wear hair any more until I had renewed the conflict and defeated them . Yes , I said , but Heracles himself is said not to be a match for two . Summon me then , he said , and I will be your Iolaus until the sun goes down . I summon you rather , I rejoined , not as Heracles summoning Iolaus , but as Iolaus might summon Heracles . That will do as well , he said . But first let us take care that we avoid a danger . Of what nature ? I said . Lest we become misologists , he replied , no worse thing can happen to a man than this . For as there are misanthropists or haters of men , there are also misologists or haters of ideas , and both spring from the same cause , which is ignorance of the world . Misanthropy arises out of the too great confidence of inexperience ; -- you trust a man and think him altogether true and sound and faithful , and then in a little while he turns out to be false and knavish ; and then another and another , and when this has happened several times to a man , especially when it happens among those whom he deems to be his own most trusted and familiar friends , and he has often quarreled with them , he at last hates all men , and believes that no one has any good in him at all . You must have observed this trait of character ? I have . And is not the feeling discreditable ? Is it not obvious that such an one having to deal with other men , was clearly without any experience of human nature ; for experience would have taught him the true state of the case , that few are the good and few the evil , and that the great majority are in the interval between them . What do you mean ? I said . I mean , he replied , as you might say of the very large and very small , that nothing is more uncommon than a very large or very small man ; and this applies generally to all extremes , whether of great and small , or swift and slow , or fair and foul , or black and white : and whether the instances you select be men or dogs or anything else , few are the extremes , but many are in the mean between them . Did you never observe this ? Yes , I said , I have . And do you not imagine , he said , that if there were a competition in evil , the worst would be found to be very few ? Yes , that is very likely , I said . Yes , that is very likely , he replied ; although in this respect arguments are unlike men -- there I was led on by you to say more than I had intended ; but the point of comparison was , that when a simple man who has no skill in dialectics believes an argument to be true which he afterwards imagines to be false , whether really false or not , and then another and another , he has no longer any faith left , and great disputers , as you know , come to think at last that they have grown to be the wisest of mankind ; for they alone perceive the utter unsoundness and instability of all arguments , or indeed , of all things , which , like the currents in the Euripus , are going up and down in never-ceasing ebb and flow . That is quite true , I said . Yes , Phaedo , he replied , and how melancholy , if there be such a thing as truth or certainty or possibility of knowledge -- that a man should have lighted upon some argument or other which at first seemed true and then turned out to be false , and instead of blaming himself and his own want of wit , because he is annoyed , should at last be too glad to transfer the blame from himself to arguments in general : and for ever afterwards should hate and revile them , and lose truth and the knowledge of realities . Yes , indeed , I said ; that is very melancholy . Let us then , in the first place , he said , be careful of allowing or of admitting into our souls the notion that there is no health or soundness in any arguments at all . Rather say that we have not yet attained to soundness in ourselves , and that we must struggle manfully and do our best to gain health of mind -- you and all other men having regard to the whole of your future life , and I myself in the prospect of death . For at this moment I am sensible that I have not the temper of a philosopher ; like the vulgar , I am only a partisan . Now the partisan , when he is engaged in a dispute , cares nothing about the rights of the question , but is anxious only to convince his hearers of his own assertions . And the difference between him and me at the present moment is merely this -- that whereas he seeks to convince his hearers that what he says is true , I am rather seeking to convince myself ; to convince my hearers is a secondary matter with me . And do but see how much I gain by the argument . For if what I say is true , then I do well to be persuaded of the truth , but if there be nothing after death , still , during the short time that remains , I shall not distress my friends with lamentations , and my ignorance will not last , but will die with me , and therefore no harm will be done . This is the state of mind , Simmias and Cebes , in which I approach the argument . And I would ask you to be thinking of the truth and not of Socrates : agree with me , if I seem to you to be speaking the truth ; or if not , withstand me might and main , that I may not deceive you as well as myself in my enthusiasm , and like the bee , leave my sting in you before I die . And now let us proceed , he said . And first of all let me be sure that I have in my mind what you were saying . Simmias , if I remember rightly , has fears and misgivings whether the soul , although a fairer and diviner thing than the body , being as she is in the form of harmony , may not perish first . On the other hand , Cebes appeared to grant that the soul was more lasting than the body , but he said that no one could know whether the soul , after having worn out many bodies , might not perish herself and leave her last body behind her ; and that this is death , which is the destruction not of the body but of the soul , for in the body the work of destruction is ever going on . Are not these , Simmias and Cebes , the points which we have to consider ? They both agreed to this statement of them . He proceeded : And did you deny the force of the whole preceding argument , or of a part only ? Of a part only , they replied . And what did you think , he said , of that part of the argument in which we said that knowledge was recollection , and hence inferred that the soul must have previously existed somewhere else before she was enclosed in the body ? Cebes said that he had been wonderfully impressed by that part of the argument , and that his conviction remained absolutely unshaken . Simmias agreed , and added that he himself could hardly imagine the possibility of his ever thinking differently . But , rejoined Socrates , you will have to think differently , my Theban friend , if you still maintain that harmony is a compound , and that the soul is a harmony which is made out of strings set in the frame of the body ; for you will surely never allow yourself to say that a harmony is prior to the elements which compose it . Never , Socrates . But do you not see that this is what you imply when you say that the soul existed before she took the form and body of man , and was made up of elements which as yet had no existence ? For harmony is not like the soul , as you suppose ; but first the lyre , and the strings , and the sounds exist in a state of discord , and then harmony is made last of all , and perishes first . And how can such a notion of the soul as this agree with the other ? Not at all , replied Simmias . And yet , he said , there surely ought to be harmony in a discourse of which harmony is the theme . There ought , replied Simmias . But there is no harmony , he said , in the two propositions that knowledge is recollection , and that the soul is a harmony . Which of them will you retain ? I think , he replied , that I have a much stronger faith , Socrates , in the first of the two , which has been fully demonstrated to me , than in the latter , which has not been demonstrated at all , but rests only on probable and plausible grounds ; and is therefore believed by the many . I know too well that these arguments from probabilities are impostors , and unless great caution is observed in the use of them , they are apt to be deceptive -- in geometry , and in other things too . But the doctrine of knowledge and recollection has been proven to me on trustworthy grounds ; and the proof was that the soul must have existed before she came into the body , because to her belongs the essence of which the very name implies existence . Having , as I am convinced , rightly accepted this conclusion , and on sufficient grounds , I must , as I suppose , cease to argue or allow others to argue that the soul is a harmony . Let me put the matter , Simmias , he said , in another point of view : Do you imagine that a harmony or any other composition can be in a state other than that of the elements , out of which it is compounded ? Certainly not . Or do or suffer anything other than they do or suffer ? He agreed . Then a harmony does not , properly speaking , lead the parts or elements which make up the harmony , but only follows them . He assented . For harmony can not possibly have any motion , or sound , or other quality which is opposed to its parts . That would be impossible , he replied . And does not the nature of every harmony depend upon the manner in which the elements are harmonized ? I do not understand you , he said . I mean to say that a harmony admits of degrees , and is more of a harmony , and more completely a harmony , when more truly and fully harmonized , to any extent which is possible ; and less of a harmony , and less completely a harmony , when less truly and fully harmonized . True . But does the soul admit of degrees ? or is one soul in the very least degree more or less , or more or less completely , a soul than another ? Not in the least . Yet surely of two souls , one is said to have intelligence and virtue , and to be good , and the other to have folly and vice , and to be an evil soul : and this is said truly ? Yes , truly . But what will those who maintain the soul to be a harmony say of this presence of virtue and vice in the soul ? -- will they say that here is another harmony , and another discord , and that the virtuous soul is harmonized , and herself being a harmony has another harmony within her , and that the vicious soul is inharmonical and has no harmony within her ? I can not tell , replied Simmias ; but I suppose that something of the sort would be asserted by those who say that the soul is a harmony . And we have already admitted that no soul is more a soul than another ; which is equivalent to admitting that harmony is not more or less harmony , or more or less completely a harmony ? Quite true . And that which is not more or less a harmony is not more or less harmonized ? True . And that which is not more or less harmonized can not have more or less of harmony , but only an equal harmony ? Yes , an equal harmony . Then one soul not being more or less absolutely a soul than another , is not more or less harmonized ? Exactly . And therefore has neither more nor less of discord , nor yet of harmony ? She has not . And having neither more nor less of harmony or of discord , one soul has no more vice or virtue than another , if vice be discord and virtue harmony ? Not at all more . Or speaking more correctly , Simmias , the soul , if she is a harmony , will never have any vice ; because a harmony , being absolutely a harmony , has no part in the inharmonical . No . And therefore a soul which is absolutely a soul has no vice ? How can she have , if the previous argument holds ? Then , if all souls are equally by their nature souls , all souls of all living creatures will be equally good ? I agree with you , Socrates , he said . And can all this be true , think you ? he said ; for these are the consequences which seem to follow from the assumption that the soul is a harmony ? It can not be true . Once more , he said , what ruler is there of the elements of human nature other than the soul , and especially the wise soul ? Do you know of any ? Indeed , I do not . And is the soul in agreement with the affections of the body ? or is she at variance with them ? For example , when the body is hot and thirsty , does not the soul incline us against drinking ? and when the body is hungry , against eating ? And this is only one instance out of ten thousand of the opposition of the soul to the things of the body . Very true . But we have already acknowledged that the soul , being a harmony , can never utter a note at variance with the tensions and relaxations and vibrations and other affections of the strings out of which she is composed ; she can only follow , she can not lead them ? It must be so , he replied . And yet do we not now discover the soul to be doing the exact opposite -- leading the elements of which she is believed to be composed ; almost always opposing and coercing them in all sorts of ways throughout life , sometimes more violently with the pains of medicine and gymnastic ; then again more gently ; now threatening , now admonishing the desires , passions , fears , as if talking to a thing which is not herself , as Homer in the Odyssee represents Odysseus doing in the words -- 'He beat his breast , and thus reproached his heart : Endure , my heart ; far worse hast thou endured ! ' Do you think that Homer wrote this under the idea that the soul is a harmony capable of being led by the affections of the body , and not rather of a nature which should lead and master them -- herself a far diviner thing than any harmony ? Yes , Socrates , I quite think so . Then , my friend , we can never be right in saying that the soul is a harmony , for we should contradict the divine Homer , and contradict ourselves . True , he said . Thus much , said Socrates , of Harmonia , your Theban goddess , who has graciously yielded to us ; but what shall I say , Cebes , to her husband Cadmus , and how shall I make peace with him ? I think that you will discover a way of propitiating him , said Cebes ; I am sure that you have put the argument with Harmonia in a manner that I could never have expected . For when Simmias was mentioning his difficulty , I quite imagined that no answer could be given to him , and therefore I was surprised at finding that his argument could not sustain the first onset of yours , and not impossibly the other , whom you call Cadmus , may share a similar fate . Nay , my good friend , said Socrates , let us not boast , lest some evil eye should put to flight the word which I am about to speak . That , however , may be left in the hands of those above , while I draw near in Homeric fashion , and try the mettle of your words . Here lies the point : -- You want to have it proven to you that the soul is imperishable and immortal , and the philosopher who is confident in death appears to you to have but a vain and foolish confidence , if he believes that he will fare better in the world below than one who has led another sort of life , unless he can prove this ; and you say that the demonstration of the strength and divinity of the soul , and of her existence prior to our becoming men , does not necessarily imply her immortality . Admitting the soul to be longlived , and to have known and done much in a former state , still she is not on that account immortal ; and her entrance into the human form may be a sort of disease which is the beginning of dissolution , and may at last , after the toils of life are over , end in that which is called death . And whether the soul enters into the body once only or many times , does not , as you say , make any difference in the fears of individuals . For any man , who is not devoid of sense , must fear , if he has no knowledge and can give no account of the soul's immortality . This , or something like this , I suspect to be your notion , Cebes ; and I designedly recur to it in order that nothing may escape us , and that you may , if you wish , add or subtract anything . But , said Cebes , as far as I see at present , I have nothing to add or subtract : I mean what you say that I mean . Socrates paused awhile , and seemed to be absorbed in reflection . At length he said : You are raising a tremendous question , Cebes , involving the whole nature of generation and corruption , about which , if you like , I will give you my own experience ; and if anything which I say is likely to avail towards the solution of your difficulty you may make use of it . I should very much like , said Cebes , to hear what you have to say . Then I will tell you , said Socrates . When I was young , Cebes , I had a prodigious desire to know that department of philosophy which is called the investigation of nature ; to know the causes of things , and why a thing is and is created or destroyed appeared to me to be a lofty profession ; and I was always agitating myself with the consideration of questions such as these : -- Is the growth of animals the result of some decay which the hot and cold principle contracts , as some have said ? Is the blood the element with which we think , or the air , or the fire ? or perhaps nothing of the kind -- but the brain may be the originating power of the perceptions of hearing and sight and smell , and memory and opinion may come from them , and science may be based on memory and opinion when they have attained fixity . And then I went on to examine the corruption of them , and then to the things of heaven and earth , and at last I concluded myself to be utterly and absolutely incapable of these enquiries , as I will satisfactorily prove to you . For I was fascinated by them to such a degree that my eyes grew blind to things which I had seemed to myself , and also to others , to know quite well ; I forgot what I had before thought self-evident truths ; e.g . such a fact as that the growth of man is the result of eating and drinking ; for when by the digestion of food flesh is added to flesh and bone to bone , and whenever there is an aggregation of congenial elements , the lesser bulk becomes larger and the small man great . Was not that a reasonable notion ? Yes , said Cebes , I think so . Well ; but let me tell you something more . There was a time when I thought that I understood the meaning of greater and less pretty well ; and when I saw a great man standing by a little one , I fancied that one was taller than the other by a head ; or one horse would appear to be greater than another horse : and still more clearly did I seem to perceive that ten is two more than eight , and that two cubits are more than one , because two is the double of one . And what is now your notion of such matters ? said Cebes . I should be far enough from imagining , he replied , that I knew the cause of any of them , by heaven I should ; for I can not satisfy myself that , when one is added to one , the one to which the addition is made becomes two , or that the two units added together make two by reason of the addition . I can not understand how , when separated from the other , each of them was one and not two , and now , when they are brought together , the mere juxtaposition or meeting of them should be the cause of their becoming two : neither can I understand how the division of one is the way to make two ; for then a different cause would produce the same effect , -- as in the former instance the addition and juxtaposition of one to one was the cause of two , in this the separation and subtraction of one from the other would be the cause . Nor am I any longer satisfied that I understand the reason why one or anything else is either generated or destroyed or is at all , but I have in my mind some confused notion of a new method , and can never admit the other . Then I heard some one reading , as he said , from a book of Anaxagoras , that mind was the disposer and cause of all , and I was delighted at this notion , which appeared quite admirable , and I said to myself : If mind is the disposer , mind will dispose all for the best , and put each particular in the best place ; and I argued that if any one desired to find out the cause of the generation or destruction or existence of anything , he must find out what state of being or doing or suffering was best for that thing , and therefore a man had only to consider the best for himself and others , and then he would also know the worse , since the same science comprehended both . And I rejoiced to think that I had found in Anaxagoras a teacher of the causes of existence such as I desired , and I imagined that he would tell me first whether the earth is flat or round ; and whichever was true , he would proceed to explain the cause and the necessity of this being so , and then he would teach me the nature of the best and show that this was best ; and if he said that the earth was in the centre , he would further explain that this position was the best , and I should be satisfied with the explanation given , and not want any other sort of cause . And I thought that I would then go on and ask him about the sun and moon and stars , and that he would explain to me their comparative swiftness , and their returnings and various states , active and passive , and how all of them were for the best . For I could not imagine that when he spoke of mind as the disposer of them , he would give any other account of their being as they are , except that this was best ; and I thought that when he had explained to me in detail the cause of each and the cause of all , he would go on to explain to me what was best for each and what was good for all . These hopes I would not have sold for a large sum of money , and I seized the books and read them as fast as I could in my eagerness to know the better and the worse . What expectations I had formed , and how grievously was I disappointed ! As I proceeded , I found my philosopher altogether forsaking mind or any other principle of order , but having recourse to air , and ether , and water , and other eccentricities . I might compare him to a person who began by maintaining generally that mind is the cause of the actions of Socrates , but who , when he endeavoured to explain the causes of my several actions in detail , went on to show that I sit here because my body is made up of bones and muscles ; and the bones , as he would say , are hard and have joints which divide them , and the muscles are elastic , and they cover the bones , which have also a covering or environment of flesh and skin which contains them ; and as the bones are lifted at their joints by the contraction or relaxation of the muscles , I am able to bend my limbs , and this is why I am sitting here in a curved posture -- that is what he would say , and he would have a similar explanation of my talking to you , which he would attribute to sound , and air , and hearing , and he would assign ten thousand other causes of the same sort , forgetting to mention the true cause , which is , that the Athenians have thought fit to condemn me , and accordingly I have thought it better and more right to remain here and undergo my sentence ; for I am inclined to think that these muscles and bones of mine would have gone off long ago to Megara or Boeotia -- by the dog they would , if they had been moved only by their own idea of what was best , and if I had not chosen the better and nobler part , instead of playing truant and running away , of enduring any punishment which the state inflicts . There is surely a strange confusion of causes and conditions in all this . It may be said , indeed , that without bones and muscles and the other parts of the body I can not execute my purposes . But to say that I do as I do because of them , and that this is the way in which mind acts , and not from the choice of the best , is a very careless and idle mode of speaking . I wonder that they can not distinguish the cause from the condition , which the many , feeling about in the dark , are always mistaking and misnaming . And thus one man makes a vortex all round and steadies the earth by the heaven ; another gives the air as a support to the earth , which is a sort of broad trough . Any power which in arranging them as they are arranges them for the best never enters into their minds ; and instead of finding any superior strength in it , they rather expect to discover another Atlas of the world who is stronger and more everlasting and more containing than the good ; -- of the obligatory and containing power of the good they think nothing ; and yet this is the principle which I would fain learn if any one would teach me . But as I have failed either to discover myself , or to learn of any one else , the nature of the best , I will exhibit to you , if you like , what I have found to be the second best mode of enquiring into the cause . I should very much like to hear , he replied . Socrates proceeded : -- I thought that as I had failed in the contemplation of true existence , I ought to be careful that I did not lose the eye of my soul ; as people may injure their bodily eye by observing and gazing on the sun during an eclipse , unless they take the precaution of only looking at the image reflected in the water , or in some similar medium . So in my own case , I was afraid that my soul might be blinded altogether if I looked at things with my eyes or tried to apprehend them by the help of the senses . And I thought that I had better have recourse to the world of mind and seek there the truth of existence . I dare say that the simile is not perfect -- for I am very far from admitting that he who contemplates existences through the medium of thought , sees them only 'through a glass darkly , ' any more than he who considers them in action and operation . However , this was the method which I adopted : I first assumed some principle which I judged to be the strongest , and then I affirmed as true whatever seemed to agree with this , whether relating to the cause or to anything else ; and that which disagreed I regarded as untrue . But I should like to explain my meaning more clearly , as I do not think that you as yet understand me . No indeed , replied Cebes , not very well . There is nothing new , he said , in what I am about to tell you ; but only what I have been always and everywhere repeating in the previous discussion and on other occasions : I want to show you the nature of that cause which has occupied my thoughts . I shall have to go back to those familiar words which are in the mouth of every one , and first of all assume that there is an absolute beauty and goodness and greatness , and the like ; grant me this , and I hope to be able to show you the nature of the cause , and to prove the immortality of the soul . Cebes said : You may proceed at once with the proof , for I grant you this . Well , he said , then I should like to know whether you agree with me in the next step ; for I can not help thinking , if there be anything beautiful other than absolute beauty should there be such , that it can be beautiful only in as far as it partakes of absolute beauty -- and I should say the same of everything . Do you agree in this notion of the cause ? Yes , he said , I agree . He proceeded : I know nothing and can understand nothing of any other of those wise causes which are alleged ; and if a person says to me that the bloom of colour , or form , or any such thing is a source of beauty , I leave all that , which is only confusing to me , and simply and singly , and perhaps foolishly , hold and am assured in my own mind that nothing makes a thing beautiful but the presence and participation of beauty in whatever way or manner obtained ; for as to the manner I am uncertain , but I stoutly contend that by beauty all beautiful things become beautiful . This appears to me to be the safest answer which I can give , either to myself or to another , and to this I cling , in the persuasion that this principle will never be overthrown , and that to myself or to any one who asks the question , I may safely reply , That by beauty beautiful things become beautiful . Do you not agree with me ? I do . And that by greatness only great things become great and greater greater , and by smallness the less become less ? True . Then if a person were to remark that A is taller by a head than B , and B less by a head than A , you would refuse to admit his statement , and would stoutly contend that what you mean is only that the greater is greater by , and by reason of , greatness , and the less is less only by , and by reason of , smallness ; and thus you would avoid the danger of saying that the greater is greater and the less less by the measure of the head , which is the same in both , and would also avoid the monstrous absurdity of supposing that the greater man is greater by reason of the head , which is small . You would be afraid to draw such an inference , would you not ? Indeed , I should , said Cebes , laughing . In like manner you would be afraid to say that ten exceeded eight by , and by reason of , two ; but would say by , and by reason of , number ; or you would say that two cubits exceed one cubit not by a half , but by magnitude ? -for there is the same liability to error in all these cases . Very true , he said . Again , would you not be cautious of affirming that the addition of one to one , or the division of one , is the cause of two ? And you would loudly asseverate that you know of no way in which anything comes into existence except by participation in its own proper essence , and consequently , as far as you know , the only cause of two is the participation in duality -- this is the way to make two , and the participation in one is the way to make one . You would say : I will let alone puzzles of division and addition -- wiser heads than mine may answer them ; inexperienced as I am , and ready to start , as the proverb says , at my own shadow , I can not afford to give up the sure ground of a principle . And if any one assails you there , you would not mind him , or answer him , until you had seen whether the consequences which follow agree with one another or not , and when you are further required to give an explanation of this principle , you would go on to assume a higher principle , and a higher , until you found a resting-place in the best of the higher ; but you would not confuse the principle and the consequences in your reasoning , like the Eristics -- at least if you wanted to discover real existence . Not that this confusion signifies to them , who never care or think about the matter at all , for they have the wit to be well pleased with themselves however great may be the turmoil of their ideas . But you , if you are a philosopher , will certainly do as I say . What you say is most true , said Simmias and Cebes , both speaking at once . ECHECRATES : Yes , Phaedo ; and I do not wonder at their assenting . Any one who has the least sense will acknowledge the wonderful clearness of Socrates ' reasoning . PHAEDO : Certainly , Echecrates ; and such was the feeling of the whole company at the time . ECHECRATES : Yes , and equally of ourselves , who were not of the company , and are now listening to your recital . But what followed ? PHAEDO : After all this had been admitted , and they had that ideas exist , and that other things participate in them and derive their names from them , Socrates , if I remember rightly , said : -- This is your way of speaking ; and yet when you say that Simmias is greater than Socrates and less than Phaedo , do you not predicate of Simmias both greatness and smallness ? Yes , I do . But still you allow that Simmias does not really exceed Socrates , as the words may seem to imply , because he is Simmias , but by reason of the size which he has ; just as Simmias does not exceed Socrates because he is Simmias , any more than because Socrates is Socrates , but because he has smallness when compared with the greatness of Simmias ? True . And if Phaedo exceeds him in size , this is not because Phaedo is Phaedo , but because Phaedo has greatness relatively to Simmias , who is comparatively smaller ? That is true . And therefore Simmias is said to be great , and is also said to be small , because he is in a mean between them , exceeding the smallness of the one by his greatness , and allowing the greatness of the other to exceed his smallness . He added , laughing , I am speaking like a book , but I believe that what I am saying is true . Simmias assented . I speak as I do because I want you to agree with me in thinking , not only that absolute greatness will never be great and also small , but that greatness in us or in the concrete will never admit the small or admit of being exceeded : instead of this , one of two things will happen , either the greater will fly or retire before the opposite , which is the less , or at the approach of the less has already ceased to exist ; but will not , if allowing or admitting of smallness , be changed by that ; even as I , having received and admitted smallness when compared with Simmias , remain just as I was , and am the same small person . And as the idea of greatness can not condescend ever to be or become small , in like manner the smallness in us can not be or become great ; nor can any other opposite which remains the same ever be or become its own opposite , but either passes away or perishes in the change . That , replied Cebes , is quite my notion . Hereupon one of the company , though I do not exactly remember which of them , said : In heaven 's name , is not this the direct contrary of what was admitted before -- that out of the greater came the less and out of the less the greater , and that opposites were simply generated from opposites ; but now this principle seems to be utterly denied . Socrates inclined his head to the speaker and listened . I like your courage , he said , in reminding us of this . But you do not observe that there is a difference in the two cases . For then we were speaking of opposites in the concrete , and now of the essential opposite which , as is affirmed , neither in us nor in nature can ever be at variance with itself : then , my friend , we were speaking of things in which opposites are inherent and which are called after them , but now about the opposites which are inherent in them and which give their name to them ; and these essential opposites will never , as we maintain , admit of generation into or out of one another . At the same time , turning to Cebes , he said : Are you at all disconcerted , Cebes , at our friend's objection ? No , I do not feel so , said Cebes ; and yet I can not deny that I am often disturbed by objections . Then we are agreed after all , said Socrates , that the opposite will never in any case be opposed to itself ? To that we are quite agreed , he replied . Yet once more let me ask you to consider the question from another point of view , and see whether you agree with me : -- There is a thing which you term heat , and another thing which you term cold ? Certainly . But are they the same as fire and snow ? Most assuredly not . Heat is a thing different from fire , and cold is not the same with snow ? Yes . And yet you will surely admit , that when snow , as was before said , is under the influence of heat , they will not remain snow and heat ; but at the advance of the heat , the snow will either retire or perish ? Very true , he replied . And the fire too at the advance of the cold will either retire or perish ; and when the fire is under the influence of the cold , they will not remain as before , fire and cold . That is true , he said . And in some cases the name of the idea is not only attached to the idea in an eternal connection , but anything else which , not being the idea , exists only in the form of the idea , may also lay claim to it . I will try to make this clearer by an example : -- The odd number is always called by the name of odd ? Very true . But is this the only thing which is called odd ? Are there not other things which have their own name , and yet are called odd , because , although not the same as oddness , they are never without oddness ? -- that is what I mean to ask -- whether numbers such as the number three are not of the class of odd . And there are many other examples : would you not say , for example , that three may be called by its proper name , and also be called odd , which is not the same with three ? and this may be said not only of three but also of five , and of every alternate number -- each of them without being oddness is odd , and in the same way two and four , and the other series of alternate